1 Esdras|11. And Josias held the Feast of the Passeover in Jerusalem to his Lord, and offered the Passeover the fourteenth day of the first month:
2. having set the Priests according to their daily courses, being arrayed in long garments, in the Temple of the Lord.
3. And he spoke to the Leuites the holy ministers of Israel, that they should hallow themselves to the Lord, to set the holy Arke of the Lord, in the house that king Solomon the son of Dauid had built:
4. And said, You shall no more bear the Arke upon your shoulders: now therefore serve the Lord your God, and minister to his people Israel, and prepare you after your families and kindreds.
5. According as Dauid the king of Israel prescribed, & according to the magnificence of Solomon his son: & standing in the Temple according to the several dignity of the families of you the Leuites, who minister in the presence of your brethren the children of Israel.
6. Offer the Passeover in order, and make ready the sacrifices for your brethren, and keep the Passeover according to the commandment of the Lord, which was given to Moyses.
7. And to the people that was found there, Josias gave thirty thousand lambs, and kids, and three thousand calves: these things were given of the kings allowance, according as he promised to the people, to the priests, and to the Leuites.
8. And Helkias, Zacharias, and Sielus the governors of the Temple, gave to the Priests for the Passeover, two thousand and six hundred sheep, and three hundred calves.
9. And Jechonias, and Samaias, and Nathanael his brother, and Assabias, and Ochiel, and Ioram captains over thousands, gave to the Leuites for the Passeover five thousand sheep, and seven hundred calves.
10. And when these things were done, the Priests and Leuites having the unleavened bread, stood in very comely order according to the kindreds,
11. And according to the several dignities of the fathers, before the people, to offer to the Lord, as it is written in the book of Moyses: And thus did they in the morning.
12. And they roasted the Passeover with fire, as appertains: as for the sacrifices, they sod them in brasse pots, and pannes with a good savor.
13. And set them before all the people, and afterward they prepared for themselves, and for the Priests their brethren the sons of Aaron.
14. For the Priests offered the fat untill night: and the Leuites prepared for themselves, and the Priests their brethren the sons of Aaron.
15. The holy Singers also, the sons of Asaph, were in their order, according to the appointment of Dauid, to wit, Asaph, Zacharias, and Ieduthun, who was of the kings retinue.
16. Moreover the porters were at every gate: it was not lawful for any to go from his ordinary service: for their brethren the Leuites prepared for them.
17. Thus were the things that belonged to the sacrifices of the Lord accomplished in that day, that they might hold the Passeover,
18. And offer sacrifices upon the altar of the Lord, according to the commandment of king Josias.
19. So the children of Israel which were present, held the Passeover at that time, and the feast of sweet bread seven days.
20. And such a Passeover was not kept in Israel since the time of the Prophet Samuel.
21. Yea all the kings of Israel held not such a Passeover as Josias, and the Priests and the Leuites, & the Jews held with all Israel that were found dwelling at Jerusalem.
22. In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josias was this Passeover kept.
23. And the works of Josias were upright before his Lord with an heart full of godliness.
24. As for the things that came to passe in his time, they were written in former times, concerning those that sinned, and did wickedly against the Lord above all people and kingdoms, and how they grieved him exceedingly, so that the words of the Lord rose up against Israel.
25. Now after all these acts of Josias, it came to passe that Pharao the king of Egypt came to raise war at Carchamis upon Euphrates: and Josias went out against him.
26. But the king of Egypt sent to him saying, What have I to do with you, O king of Judea?
27. I am not sent out from the Lord God against you: for my war is upon Euphrates, and now the Lord is with me, yea the Lord is with me hasting me forward: Depart from me and be not against the Lord.
28. However Josias did not turn back his chariot from him, but undertook to fight with him, not regarding the words of the Prophet Jeremy, spoken by the mouth of the Lord:
29. But joined battle with him in the plain of Magiddo, and the princes came against king Josias.
30. Then said the king to his servants, carry me away out of the battle for I am very weak: and immediately his servants took him away out of the battle.
31. Then gate he up upon his second chariot, and being brought back to Jerusalem, dyed, and was buried in his fathers sepulcher.
32. And in all Iury they mourned for Josias, yea Jeremy the Prophet lamented for Josias, and the chief men with the women made lamentation for him to this day: and this was given out for an ordinance to be done continually in all the nation of Israel.
33. These things are written in the book of the stories of the kings of Judah, and every one of the acts that Josias did, and his glory, and his understanding in the law of the Lord, and the things that he had done before, and the things now recited, are reported in the books of the Kings of Israel and Judea.
34. And the people took Joachaz the son of Josias, and made him king in stead of Josias his father, when he was twenty and three years old.
35. And he reigned in Judea and in Jerusalem three months: and then the King of Egypt deposed him from reigning in Jerusalem.
36. And he set a tax upon the land of an hundred talents of silver, and one talent of gold.
37. The king of Egypt also made king Joacim his brother king of Judea and Jerusalem.
38. And he bound Joacim and the nobles: but Zaraces his brother he apprehended, and brought him out of Egypt.
39. Five and twenty year old was Joacim when he was made king in the land of Judea and Jerusalem, and he did evil before the Lord.
40. Therefore against him Nabuchodonosor the King of Babylon came up, and bound him with a chain of brasse, and carried him to Babylon.
41. Nabuchodonosor also took of the holy vessels of the Lord, and carried them away, and set them in his own temple at Babylon.
42. But those things that are recorded of him, and of his uncleanness, and impiety, are written in the Chronicles of the kings.
43. And Joacim his son reigned in his stead: he was made king being eighteen years old,
44. And reigned but three months and ten days in Jerusalem, and did evil before the Lord.
45. So after a yere Nabuchodonosor sent, and caused him to be brought into Babylon with the holy vessels of the Lord,
46. And made Zedechias king of Judea and Jerusalem, when he was one and twenty years old, and he reigned eleven years:
47. And he did evil also in the sight of the Lord, & cared not for the words that were spoken to him, by the Prophet Jeremy from the mouth of the Lord.
48. And after that king Nabuchodonosor had made him to swear by the Name of the Lord, he forswore himself, and rebelled, and hardening his neck, and his heart, he transgressed the laws of the Lord God of Israel.
49. The governors also of the people and of the priests did many things against the laws, and passed al the pollutions of all nations, and defiled the Temple of the Lord which was sanctified in Jerusalem.
50. Nevertheless, the God of their fathers sent by his messenger to call them back, because he spared them and his tabernacle also:
51. But they had his messengers in derision, and look when the lord spoke to them, they made a sport of his prophets,
52. So far forth that he being wroth with his people for their great ungodliness, commanded the kings of the Caldees to come up against them.
53. Who flew their young men with the sword, yea even within the compass of their holy Temple, & spared neither young man nor maid, old man nor child among them, for he delivered all into their hands.
54. And they took all the holy vessels of the Lord, both great and small, with the vessels of the Ark of God, and the kings treasures, and caried them away into Babylon.
55. As for the house of the Lord they burnt it, brake down the walls of Jerusalem, set fire upon her towers.
56. And as for her glorious things, they never ceased till they had consumed and brought them all to nought, and the people that were not slain with the sword, he caried to Babylon:
57. Who became servants to him and his children, till the Persians reigned, to fulfill the word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremy:
58. Untill the land had enjoyed her Sabbaths, the whole time of her desolation shall she rest, untill the full term of seventy years.1 Esdras|21. In the first year of Cyrus king of the Persians, that the word of the lord might be accomplished, that he had promised by the mouth of Jeremy:
2. The Lord raised up the spirit of Cyrus the king of the Persians, and he made proclamation through al his kingdom, and also by writing,
3. Saying, Thus says Cyrus king of the Persians, The Lord of Israel the most high Lord, has made me king of the whole world,
4. And commanded me to build him an house at Jerusalem in Iury.
5. If therefore there be any of you that are of his people, let the Lord, even his Lord be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem that is in Judea, and build the house of the Lord of Israel: for he is the Lord that dwells in Jerusalem.
6. whosoever then dwell in the places about, let them help him, those I say that are his neighbours, with gold and with silver,
7. With gifts, with horses, and with cattle, and other things, which have been set forth by vow, for the Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem.
8. ¶ Then the chief of the families of Judea, and of the tribes of Beniamin stood up: the priests also and the Leuites, and all they whose mind the Lord had moved to go up, and to build an house for the Lord at Jerusalem,
9. And they that dwelt round about them, and helped them in all things with silver and gold, with horses and cattle, and with very free gifts of a great number whose minds were stirred up thereto.
10. King Cyrus also brought forth the holy vessels which Nabuchodonosor had caried away from Jerusalem, and had set up in his temple of idols.
11. Now when Cyrus king of the Persians had brought them forth, he delivered them to Mithridates his treasurer:
12. And by him they were delivered to Sanabassar the governor of Judea.
13. And this was the number of them, a thousand golden cups, and a thousand of silver, censers of silver twenty nine, vials of gold thirty, and of silver two thousand four hundred and ten, and a thousand other vessels.
14. So all the vessels of gold, and of silver which were caried away, were five thousand, four hundred, threescore and nine.
15. These were brought back by Sanabassar, together with them of the captivity, from Babylon to Jerusalem.
16. But in the time of Artaxerxes king of the Persians, Belemus, and Mithridates, and Tabellivs, and Rathumus, and Beeltethmus, and Semellivs the Secretary, with others that were in commission with them, dwelling in Samaria and other places, wrote to him against them that dwelt in Judea and Jerusalem, these letters following.
17. To King Artaxerxes our lord, Your servants Rathumus the story writer, and Semellivs the scribe, and the rest of their counsel, and the Judges that are in Coelosyria and Phenice.
18. Be it now known to the lord the king, that the Jews that are come up from you to us, being come into Jerusalem (that rebellious and wicked city,) do build the market places, and repair the walls of it, and do lay the foundation of the Temple.
19. Now if this city, and the walls of it be made up again, they will not only refuse to give tribute, but also rebel against kings.
20. And since as the things pertaining to the Temple, are now in hand, we think it meet not to neglect such a matter,
21. But to speak to our lord the king, to the intent that if it be your pleasure, it may be sought out in the books of your fathers:
22. And you shall find in the Chronicles, what is written concerning these things, and shall understand that that city was rebellious, troubling both kings and cities:
23. And that the Jews were rebellious, and raised always wars in it, for the which cause even this city was made desolate.
24. Therefore now we do declare to you, (O lord the king) that if this city be built again, and the walls of it set up anew, you shall from henceforth have no passage into Corlosyria and Phenice.
25. Then the King wrote back again to Rathumus the story-writer, to Beeltethmus, to Semellivs the scribe, and to the rest that were in commission, and dwellers in Samaria and Syria, and Phenice, after this manner.
26. I have read the Epistle which you have sent to me: therefore I commanded to make diligent search, and it has been found, that that city was from the beginning practising against Kings.
27. And the men in it were given to rebellion, and war, and that mighty Kings and fierce were in Jerusalem, who reigned and exacted tributes in Coelosyria and Phenice.
28. Now therefore I have commanded to hinder those men from building the city, and heed to be taken that there be no more done in it,
29. And that those wicked workers proceed no further to the annoyance of Kings.
30. Then king Artaxerxes his letters being read, Rathumus and Semellivs the scribe, and the rest that were in commission with them, remoouing in have towards Jerusalem with a troupe of horsemen, and a multitude of people in battle array, began to hinder the builders, and the building of the Temple in Jerusalem ceased untill the second year of the reign of Darivs King of the Persians.1 Esdras|31. Now when Darivs reigned, he made a great feast to all his subjects and to all his household, and to all the princes of Media and Persia,
2. And to all the governors and captains, and lieutenants that were under him, from Judia to Ethiopia, of an hundred twenty and seven provinces.
3. And when they had eaten and drunken, and being satisfied were gone home, then Darivs the king went into his bed chamber, and slept, and soon after awaked.
4. Then three young men that were of the guard, that kept the kings body, spoke one to another:
5. Let every one of us speak a sentence: he that shall overcome, & whose sentence shall seem wiser then the others, to him shall the king Darivs give great gifts, and great things in token of victory:
6. As to be clothed in purple, to drink in gold, and to sleep upon gold, and a chariot with bridles of gold, and an head-tyre of fine linen, and a chain about his neck:
7. And he shall sit next to Darivs, because of his wisdom, and shall be called, Darivs his cousin.
8. And then every one wrote his sentence, sealed it, and laid it under king Darivs his pillow,
9. And said, that when the king is risen, some will give him the writings, and of whose side the king, and the three princes of Persia shall judge, that his sentence is the wisest, to him shall the victory be given as was appointed.
10. The first wrote: Wine is the strongest.
11. The second wrote: The King is strongest.
12. The third wrote; Women are strongest, but above all things truth bears away the victory.
13. ¶ Now when the king was risen up, they took their writings, and delivered them to him, and so he read them.
14. And sending forth, he called all the Princes of Persia and Media, and the governors, and the captains, and the lieutenants, and the chief officers,
15. And sate him down in the royal seat of judgment, and the writings were read before them:
16. And he said, Call the young men, and they shall declare their own sentences: so they were called, and came in.
17. And he said to them, Declare to us your mind, concerning the writings. Then began the first, who had spoken of the strength of wine;
18. And he said thus: O you men, how exceeding strong is wine! it causes all men to err that drink it:
19. It makes the mind of the king, and of the fatherless child to be all one of the bondman and of the freeman, of the poor man and of the rich:
20. It turns also every thought into iollity and mirth, so that a man remembers neither sorrow nor debt:
21. And it makes every heart rich, so that a man remembers neither king nor governor, and it makes to speak all things by talents:
22. And when they are in their cups, they forget their love both to friends and brethren, and a little after draw out swords:
23. But when they are from the wine, they remember not what they have done.
24. O you men, is not wine the strongest, that enforces to do thus? And when he had so spoken, he held his peace.1 Esdras|41. Then the second that had spoken of the strength of the King, began to say;
2. O you men, do not men excel in strength, that bear rule over Sea and land, and all things in them?
3. But yet the King is more mighty: for he is lord of all these things, and has dominion over them, and whatsoever he commands them, they do:
4. If you bid them make war the one against the other, they do it: if he send them out against the enemies, they go, and break down mountains, walls and towers.
5. They slay and are slain, and transgress not the Kings commandment: if they get the victory, they bring all to the King, as well the spoil as all things else.
6. Likewise for those that are no soldiers, and have not to do with wars, but use husbandry; when they have reaped again, that which they had sowen, they bring it to the King, and compel one another to pay tribute to the King.
7. And yet he is but one man; if he command to kill, they kill, if he command to spare, they spare.
8. If he command to smite, they smite; if he command to make desolate, they make desolate; if he command to build, they build:
9. If he command to cut down, they cut down; if he command to plant, they plant.
10. So all his people and his armies obey him; furthermore he lies down, he eats and drinks, & takes his rest.
11. And these keep (watch) round about him, neither may any one depart, and do his own business, neither disobey they him in any thing.
12. O you men, how should not the King be mighti, when in such sort he is obeyed? and he held his tongue.
13. ¶ Then the third, who had spoken of women, and of the truth (this was Zorobabel) began to speak.
14. O you men, it is not the great King, nor the multitude of men, neither is it wine that excelles; who is it then that rules them, or has the lordship over them, are they not women?
15. Women have borne the King and all the people, that bear rule by sea and land.
16. Even of th&#275; came they: & they nourished them up that planted the vineyards from from where the wine comes.
17. These also make garments for men; these bring glory to men, and without women cannot men be.
18. Yea and if men have gathered together gold and silver, or any other goodly thing, do they not love a woman, which is comely in favor and beauty?
19. And letting all those things go, do they not gape, and even with open mouth fix their eyes fast on her; and have not all men more desire to her, then to silver or gold, or any goodly thing whatsoever?
20. A man leaves his own father that brought him up, and his own country, and cleaves to his wife.
21. He stickes not to spend his life with his wife, and remembers neither father, nor mother, nor country.
22. By this also you must know, that women have dominion over you: do you not labour and toil, and give and bring all to the woman?
23. Yea a man takes his sword, and goes his way to rob, and to steal, to sail upon the sea, and upon rivers,
24. And looks upon a lyon, and goes in the darkness, and when he has stolen, spoiled and robbed, he brings it to his love.
25. Therefore a man loves his wife better then father and mother.
26. Yea many there be that have run out of their wits for women, and become servants for their sakes:
27. Many also have perished, have erred, and sinned for women.
28. And now do you not believe me? is not the King great in his power? do not all regions fear to touch him?
29. Yet did I see him and Apame the Kings concubine, the daughter of the admirable Bartacus, sitting at the right hand of the King,
30. And taking the crown from the Kings head, and setting it upon her own head; she also struck the King with her left hand.
31. And yet for all this, the King gaped and gazed upon her with open mouth: if she laughed upon him, he laughed also: but if she took any displeasure at him, the King was fain to flatter, that she might be reconciled to him again.
32. O you men, how can it be but women should be strong, seeing they do thus?
33. Then the king & the princes looked one upon another: so he began to speak of the truth.
34. O you men, are not women strong? great is the earth, high is the heaven, swift is the Sun in his course, for he compasses the heavens round about, and fetches his course again to his own place in one day.
35. Is he not great that makes these things? therefore great is the truth, and stronger then all things.
36. All the earth calls upon the truth, & the heaven blesses it, all works shake and tremble at it, and with it is no unrighteous thing.
37. Wine is wicked, the king is wicked, women are wicked, all the children of men are wicked, and such are all their wicked works, and there is no truth in them. In their unrighteousness also they shall perish.
38. As for the truth it endures, and is always strong, it lives and conqueres for evermore.
39. With her there is no accepting of persons, or rewards, but she does the things that are just, and refraines from all unjust and wicked things, and all men do well like of her works.
40. Neither in her judgment is any unrighteousness, & she is the strength, kingdom, power and majesty of all ages. Blessed be the God of truth.
41. And with that he held his peace, and al the people then shouted and said, Great is truth, and mighty above all things.
42. Then said the king to him, ask what you will, more then is appointed in the writing, and we will give it you, because you are found wisest, and you shall sit next me, and shall be called my cousin.
43. Then said he to the king, Remember your vow which you have vowed to build Jerusalem in the day when you cam to the kingdom,
44. And to send away all the vessels that were taken away out of Jerusalem, which Cyrus set apart, when he vowed to destroy Babylon, and to send them again there.
45. You also have vowed to build up the Temple, which the Edomites burnt when Judea was made desolate by the Chaldees.
46. And now, O lord the king, this is that which I require, and which I desire of you, and this is the princely liberality proceeding from yourself: I desire therefore that you make good the vow, the performance of which with your own mouth you have vowed to the king of heaven.
47. Then Darivs the king stood up and kissed him, and wrote letters for him to all the treasurers and lieutenants, and captains and governors that they should safely convey on their way, both him, and all those that go up with him to build Jerusalem.
48. He wrote letters also to the lieutenants that were in Coelosyria and Phenice, and to them in Libanus, that they should bring Cedar wood from Libanus to Jerusalem, and that they should build the city with him
49. Moreover he wrote for all the Jews that went out of his realm up into Iury, concerning their freedom, that no officer, no ruler, no lieutenant, nor treasurer, should forcibly enter into their dores,
50. And that all the country which they hold, should be free without tribute, & that the Edomites should give over the villages of the Jews which then they held,
51. Yea that there should be yereely given twenty talents to the building of the Temple, untill you time that it were built,
52. And other ten talents yearly, to maintain the burnt offerings upon the Altar every day (as they had a commandment to offer seventeen)
53. And that all they that went from Babylon to build the city, should have free liberty as well they as their posterity, and all the priests that went away.
54. He wrote also concerning the charges, and the priests vestments in which they minister:
55. And likewise for the charges of the Leuites, to be given them, untill the day that the house were finished, and Jerusalem builded up.
56. And he commanded to give to all that kept the city, pensions and wages.
57. He sent away also all the vessels fro Babylon that Cyrus had set apart, and all that Cyrus had given in commandment, the same charged he also to be done, and sent to Jerusalem.
58. Now when this young man was gone forth, he lifted up his face to heaven toward Jerusalem, and praised the king of heaven,
59. And said, From you comes victory, from you comes wisdom, and your is the glory, & I am your servant.
60. Blessed are you who have given me wisdom: for to you I give thanks, O Lord of our fathers.
61. And so he took the letters, and went out, and came to Babylon, and told it all his brethren.
62. And they praised the God of their fathers: because he had given them freedom and liberty
63. To go up, and to build Jerusalem, and the Temple which is called by his Name, and they feasted with instruments of music, & gladness seven days.1 Esdras|51. After this were the principal men of the families chosen according to their tribes, to go up with their wives, and sons, and daughters, with their men-servants and maid-servants, and their cattle.
2. And Darivs sent with them a thousand horsemen, till they had brought them back to Jerusalem safely, and with musical tabrets and flutes:
3. And all their brethren played, and he made them go up together with them.
4. And these are the names of the men which went up, according to their families, amongst their tribes, after their several heads.
5. The priests the sons of Phinees, the son of Aaron: Jesus the son of Josedec, the son of Saraias, and Joachim the son of Zorobabel, the son of Salathiel of the house of Dauid, out of the kindred of Phares, of the tribe of Juda;
6. Who spoke wise sentences before Darivs the king of Persia, in the second year of his reign, in the month Nisan, which is the first month.
7. And these are they of Iewry that came up from the captivity, where they dwelt as strangers, whom Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon had carried away to Babylon:
8. And they returned to Jerusalem, and to the other parts of Iury every man to his own city, who came with Zorobabel, with Jesus, Nehemias, and Zacharias, and Reesaias, Enenivs, Mardocheus, Beelsarus, Aspharasus, Reelivs, Roimus, and Baana their guides.
9. The number of them of the nation, and their governors: sons of Phoros two thousand an hundred seventy and two: the sons of Saphat four hundred seventy and two;
10. The sons of Ares seven hundred fifty and six:
11. The sons of Phaath Moab, two thousand eight hundred & twelve:
12. The sons of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four: the sons of Zathui, nine hundred forty and five: the sons of Corbe seven hundred and five: the sons of Bani, six hundred forty and eight:
13. The sons of Bebai, six hundred twenty and three: the sons of Sadas, three thousand two hundred twenty and two:
14. The sons of Adonican, six hundred sixty and seven: the sons of Bagoi, two thousand sixty and six: the sons of Adin, four hundred fifty and four:
15. The sons of Aterezias, ninety and two: the sons of Ceilan and Azetas, threescore and seven: the sons of Azuran, four hundred thirty & two.
16. The sons of Ananias, an hundred and one: the sons of Arom thirty two, and the sons of Bassa, three hundred twenty and three: the sons of Azephurith, an hundred and two:
17. The sons of Meterus, three thousand and five: the sons of Bethlomon, an hundred twenty and three.
18. They of Netophah fifty and five: they of Anathoth, an hundred fifty and eight: they of Bethsamos, forty and two:
19. They of Kiriathiarivs, twenty and five: they of Caphira and Beroth, seven hundred forty and three: they of Pyra, seven hundred:
20. They of Chadias and Ammidioi, four hundred twenty and two: they of Cyrama, and Gabdes, six hundred twenty and one:
21. They of Macalon, an hundred twenty and two: they of Betolivs fifty and two: the sons of Nephis, an hundred fifty and six.
22. The sons of Calamolalus, and Onus, seven hundred twenty and five: the sons of Jerechus, two hundred forty and five:
23. The sons of Annaas, three thousand three hundred and thirty:
24. The Priests, the sons of Ieddu, the son of Jesus, among the sons of Sanasib, nine hundred seventy and two: the sons of Meruth, a thousand fifty and two:
25. The sons of Phassaron, a thousand forty and seven: the sons of Carme a thousand and seventeen.
26. The Leuites: the sons of Jessue, and Cadmiel, and Banuas, and Sudias, seventy and four.
27. The holy singers: the sons of Asaph an hundred twenty and eight.
28. The porters: the sons of Salum, the sons of Iatal, the sons of Talmon, the sons of Dacobi, the sons of Teta, the sons of Sami, in all an hundred thirty and nine.
29. The servants of the Temple: the sons of Esau, the sons of Asipha, the sons of Tabaoth, the sons of Ceras: the sons of Sud, the sons of Phaleas, the sons of Labana, the sons of Graba:
30. The sons of Acua, the sons of Uta, the sons of Cetab, the sons of Agaba, the sons of Subai, the sons of Anan, the sons of Cathua, the sons of Geddur:
31. The sons of Airus, the sons of Daisan, the sons of Noeba, the sons of Chaseba, the sons of Gazera, the sons of Azia, the sons of Phinees, the sons of Azara, the sons of Bastai, the sons of Asana the sons of Meani, the sons of Naphisi, the sons of Acub, the sons of Asipha, the sons of Assur, the sons of Pharacim, the sons of Basaloth.
32. The sons of Meeda: the sons of Coutha, the sons of Charea, the sons of Chareus, the sons of Aserer, the sons of Thomoi, the sons of Nasith, the sons of Atipha.
33. The sons of the servants of Solomon: the sons of Azaphion, the sons of Pharira, the sons of Ioeli, the sons of Lozon, the sons of Isdael, the sons of SaphEs:
34. The sons of Hagia, the sons of PhacarEs, the sons of Saby, the sons of Sarothy, the sons of Masias, the sons of Gar, the sons of Addus, the sons of Suba, the sons of Apherra, the sons of Barodis, the sons of Sabat, the sons of Allom.
35. All the ministers of the Temple, and the sons of the servants of Solomon, were three hundred seventy & two.
36. These came up from ThermelEs, and Thelersas, Charaathalar leading them and Aalar.
37. Neither could they show their families, nor their stock, how they were of Israel: the sons of Ladan, the sons of Ban, the sons of Necodan, six hundred fifty and two.
38. And of the Priests that usurped the office of the Priesthood, and were not found, the sons of Obdia: the sons of Accoz, the sons of Addus, who married Augia one of the daughters of Berzelus, and was named after his name.
39. And when the description of the kindred of these men was sought in the Register, and was not found, they were removed from executing the office of the Priesthood.
40. For to them said Nehemias, and Atharias, that they should not be partakers of the holy things, till there arose up an high Pri, clothed with Doctrine and truth.
41. So of Israel from them of twelve years old and upward, they were all in number forty thousand, besides men servants and women servants, two thousand three hundred and sixty.
42. Their men servants and handmaids were seven thousand three hundred forty and seven: the singing men and singing women, two hundred forty and five.
43. four hundred thirty and five camels, seven thousand thirty and six horses, two hundred forty and five mules, five thousand five hundred twenty & five beasts used to the yoke.
44. And certain of the chief of their families, when they came to the Temple of God that is in Jerusalem, vowed to set up the house again in his own place according to their ability:
45. And to give into the holy treasury of the works, a thousand pounds of gold, five thousand of silver, and an hundred priestly vestments.
46. And so dwelt the Priests, and the Leuites, and the people in Jerusalem, and in the country: the Singers also, and the Porters, and all Israel in their villages.
47. But when the seventh month was at hand, and when the children of Israel were every man in his own place, they came all together with one consent into the open place of the first gate, which is towards the East.
48. Then stood up Jesus the son of Josedec, and his brethren the Priests, and Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and his brethren, and made ready the Altar of the God of Israel,
49. To offer burnt sacrifices upon it, according as it is expressly commanded in the book of Moses the man of God.
50. And there were gathered to them out of the other nations of the land, and they erected the Altar upon his own place, because all the nations of the land were at enmity with them, and oppressed them, and they offered sacrifices according to the time, and burnt offerings to the Lord both morning, and evening.
51. Also they held the feast of Tabernacles, as it is commanded in the law, and offered sacrifices daily as was meet:
52. And after, that the continual oblations, and the sacrifice of the Sabbaths, and of the new Moones, and of all holy feasts.
53. And all they that had made any vow to God, began to offer sacrifices to God from the first day of the seventh month, although the Temple of the Lord was not yet built.
54. And they gave to the Masons and Carpenters, money, meat and drink with cheerfulness.
55. Unto them of Sidon also and Tyre, they gave carres that they should bring Cedar trees from Libanus, which should be brought by flotes to the hauen of Iop, according as it was commanded them by Cyrus King of the Persians.
56. And in the second year and second month, after his coming to the Temple of God at Jerusalem, began Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Jesus the son of Josedec, and their brethren and the priests, and the Leuites, and all they that were come to Jerusalem out of the captivity:
57. And they laid the foundation of the house of God, in the first day of the second month, in the second year after they were come to Iury & Jerusalem.
58. And they appointed the Lenites from twenty years old, over the works of the Lord. Then stood up Jesus and his sons, and brethren, and Cadmiel his brother, & the sons of Madiabun, with the sons of Ioda the son of Eliadun, with their sons and brethren, all Leuites, with one accord seters forward of the business, labouring to advance the works in the house of God. So the workmen built the temple of the Lord.
59. And the Priests stood arrayed in their vestiments with musical instruments, and trumpets, and the Leuites the sons of Asaph had Cymbals,
60. Singing songs of thanksgiving, and praising the Lord according as Dauid the king of Israel had ordained.
61. And they sung with loud voices songs to the praise of the Lord: because his mercy and glory is for ever in all Israel.
62. And all the people sounded trumpets, and shouted with a loud voice, singing songs of thanksgiving to the Lord for the rearing up of the house of the Lord.
63. Also of the Priests and Leuites, and of the chief of their families the ancients who had seen the former house, came to the building of this with weeping and great crying.
64. But many with trumpets and joy shouted with loud voice.
65. So much that the trumpets might not be heard for the weeping of the people: yet the multitude sounded marvelously, so that it was heard a far off.
66. Therefore when the enemies of the Tribe of Juda and Beniamin heard it, they came to know what that noise of trumpets should mean.
67. And they perceived, that they that were of the captivity did build the temple to the Lord God of Israel.
68. So they went to Zorobabel and Jesus, and to the chief of the families, and said to them, We will build together with you.
69. For we likewise, as you, do obey your Lord, and do sacrifice to him from the days of AsbazarEs the king of the Assyrians who brought us here
70. Then Zorobabel and Jesus, and the chief of the families of Israel said to them, It is not for us and you to build together an house to the Lord our God.
71. We ourselves alone will build to the Lord of Israel, according as Cyrus the King of the Persians has commanded us.
72. But the heathen of the land lying heavy upon the inhabitants of Judea, and holding them strait, hindered their building:
73. And by their secret plots, and popular persuasions, and commotions, they hindered the finishing of the building, all the time that king Cyrus lived, so they were hindered from building for the space of two years, untill the reign of Darivs.1 Esdras|61. Now in the second year of the reign of Darivs, Aggeus, and Zacharias the son of Addo, the prophets prophesied to the Jews, in Iury and Jerusalem in the Name of the Lord God of Israel which was upon them.
2. Then stood up Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Jesus the son of Josedec, and began to build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, the prophets of the Lord being with them,and helping them.
3. At the same time came to them Sisinnes the governor of Syria, and Phenice, with Sathrabuzanes, and his companions, and said to them,
4. By whose appointment do you build this house, and this roof, and perform all the other things? and who are the workmen that perform these things?
5. Nevertheless the Elders of the Jews obtained favor: because the Lord had visited the captivity.
6. And they were not hindered from building until such time as signification was given to Darivs concerning them, and an answer received.
7. The copy of the letters which Sisinnes governor of Syria, and Phenice, and Sathrabuzanes with their companions rulers in Syria and Phenice, wrote and sent to Darivs, To king Darivs, greeting.
8. Let all things be known to our lord the King, that being come into the country of Judea, and entered into the city of Jerusalem, we found in the city of Jerusalem the ancients of the Jews that were of the captivity;
9. Building an house to the Lord, great, and new, of hewn and costly stones, and the timber already laid upon the walls.
10. And those works are done with great speed, and the work goes on prosperously in their hands, and with all glory and diligence is it made.
11. Then asked we these Elders, saying, By whose commandment build you this house, and lay the foundations of these works?
12. Therefore to the intent that we might give knowledge to you by writing, we demanded of them who were the chief doers, and we required of them the names in writing of their principal men.
13. So they gave us this answer: We are the servants of the Lord which made heaven and earth.
14. And as for this house, it was builded many years ago, by a king of Israel great and strong, and was finished.
15. But when our fathers provoked God to wrath, and sinned against the Lord of Israel which is in heaven, he gave them over into the power of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon of the Chaldees:
16. Who pulled down the house and burnt it, and caried away the people captives to Babylon.
17. But in the first year that King Cyrus reigned over the country of Babylon, Cyrus the king wrote to build up this house.
18. And the holy vessels of gold and of silver, that Nabuchodonosor had caried away out of the house at Jerusalem, and had set them in his own temple, those Cyrus the king brought forth again out of the temple at Babylon, and they were delivered to Zorobabel and to Sanabassarus the ruler,
19. With commandment that he should carry away the same vessels, and put them in the Temple at Jerusalem, and that the Temple of the Lord should be built in his place.
20. Then the same Sanabassarus being come here, laid the foundations of the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, and from that time to this, being still a building, it is not yet fully ended.
21. Now therefore if it seem good to the king, let search be made among the records of King Cyrus,
22. And if it be found, that the building of the house of the Lord at Jerusalem has been done with the consent of King Cyrus, and if our lord the king be so minded, let him signify to us of it.
23. Then commanded king Darivs to seek among the records at Babylon: and so at Ecbatana the palace which is in the country of Media, there was found a roll in which these things were recorded.
24. In the first year of the reign of Cyrus, king Cyrus commanded that the house of the Lord at Jerusalem should be built again where they do sacrifice with continual fire.
25. Whose height shall be sixty cubits, and the breadth sixty cubits, with three rowes of hewn stones, and one row of new wood of that country, and the expenses of it to be given out of the house of king Cyrus.
26. And that the holy vessels of the house of the Lord, both of gold and silver that Nabuchodonosor took out of the house at Jerusalem, and brought to Babylon, should be restored to the house at Jerusalem, and be set in the place where they were before.
27. And also he commanded that Sisinnes the governor of Syria and Phenice, and Sathrabuzanes, and their companions, and those which were appointed rulers in Syria, and Phenice should be careful not to meddle with the place, but suffer Zorobabel the servant of the Lord, and governor of Judea, and the Elders of the Jews, to build the house of the Lord in that place.
28. I have commanded also to have it built up whole again, and that they look diligently to help those that be of the captivity of the Jews, till the house of the Lord be finished.
29. And out of the tribute of Coelosyria, and Phenice, a portion carefully to be given these men, for the sacrifices of the Lord that is, to Zorobabel the governor, for bullocks, and rams, and lambs;
30. And also corn, salt, wine and oil, and that continually every year without further question, according as the Priests that be in Jerusalem shall signify, to be daily spent:
31. That offerings may be made to the most high God, for the king and for his children, and that they may pray for their lives.
32. And he commanded, that whosoever should transgress, yea, or make light of any thing before spoken or written, out of his own house should a tree be taken, and he thereon be hanged, and all his goods seized for the king.
33. The Lord therefore whose Name is there called upon, utterly destroy every king and nation, that stretches out his hand to hinder or endammage that house of the Lord in Jerusalem.
34. I Darivs the king have ordained, that according to these things it be done with diligence.1 Esdras|71. Then Sisinnes the governor of Coelosyria, and Phenice, and Sathrabuzanes, with their companions, following the commandments of king Darivs,
2. Did very carefully oversee the holy works, assisting the ancients of the Jews, & governors of the Temple.
3. And so the holy works prospered, when Aggeus, and Zacharias the Prophets prophecied.
4. And they finished these things, by the commandment of the Lord God of Israel, and with the consent of Cyrus, Darivs, and Artaxerxes, kings of Persia.
5. And thus was the holy house finished, in the three and twentieth day of the month Adar, in the sixth year of Darivs king of the Persians.
6. And the children of Israel: the Priests, and the Leuites, and other that were of the captivity, that were added to them, did according to the things written in the book of Moses.
7. And to the dedication of the Temple of the Lord, they offered an hundred bullockes, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs;
8. And twelve goats for the sin of all Israel, according to the number of the chief of the tribes of Israel.
9. The Priests also and the Leuites, stood arrayed in their vestments according to their kindreds, in the seruices of the Lord God of Israel, according to the book of Moses: and the porters at every gate.
10. And the children of Israel that were of the captivity, held the Passeover the fourteenth day of the first moves, after that the Priests and the Leuites were sanctified.
11. They that were of the captivity were not all sanctified together: but the Leuites were all sanctified together,
12. And so they offered the Passeover for all them of the captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and for themselves.
13. And the children of Israel that came out of the captivity, did eat, even all they that had separated themselves from the abominations of the people of the land, and sought the Lord.
14. And they kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days, making mercy before the Lord,
15. For that he had turned the counsel of the King of Assyria towards them to strengthen their hands in the works of the Lord God of Israel.1 Esdras|81. And after these things, when Artaxerxes the king of the Persians reigned, came Esdras the son of Saraias, the son of Ezerias, the son of Helchiah, the son of Salum,
2. The son of Sadduc, the son of Achitob, the son of Amarias, the son of Ozias, the son of Memeroth, the son of Zaraias, the son of Sauias, the son of Boccas, the son of Abisum, the son of Phinees, the son of Eleasar, the son of Aaron the chief Pri.
3. This Esdras went up from Babylon, as a Scribe being very ready in the Law of Moyses, that was given by the God of Israel,
4. And the king did him honor: for he found grace in his sight in all his requests.
5. There went up with him also certain of the children of Israel, of the Priests, of the Leuites, of the holy Singers, Porters, and Ministers of the Temple, to Jerusalem,
6. In the seventh yere of the reign of king Artaxerxes, in the fifth month, (this was the kings seventh year) for they went from Babylon in the first day of the first month, and came to Jerusalem, according to the prosperous journey which the Lord gave them.
7. For Esdras had very great skill, so that he omitted nothing of the Law and commandments of the Lord, but taught all Israel the Ordinances and judgments.
8. Now the copy of the Commission which was written from Artaxerxes the King, and came to Esdras the pri and reader of the Law of the Lord, is this that follows.
9. King Artaxerxes to Esdras the Pri and reader of the Law of the Lord, sends greeting.
10. having determined to deal graciously, I have given order, that such of the nation of the Jews, and of the Priests and Leuites being within our realm, as are willing and desirous, should go with you to Jerusalem.
11. As many therefore as have a mind thereunto, let them depart with you, as it has seemed good both to me, & my seven friends the counselors,
12. That they may look to the affairs of Judea and Jerusalem, agreeably to that which is in the Law of the Lord.
13. And cary the gifts to the Lord of Israel to Jerusalem, which I and my friends have vowed, and all the gold and silver that in the country of Babylon can be found, to the Lord in Jerusalem,
14. With that also which is given of the people, for the Temple of the Lord their God at Jerusalem: and that silver and gold may be collected for bullocks, rams and lambs, and things thereunto appertaining,
15. To the end that they may offer sacrifices to the Lord, upon the Altar of the Lord their God, which is in Jerusalem.
16. And whatsoever you and your brethren will do with the silver and gold, that do according to the will of your God.
17. And the holy vessels of the Lord which are given you, for the use of the Temple of your God which is in Jerusalem, you shall set before your God in Jerusalem.
18. And whatsoever thing else you shall remember for the use of the Temple of your God, you shall give it out of the kings treasury.
19. And I, king Artaxerxes, have also commanded the keepers of the treasures in Syria and Phenice, that whatsoever Esdras the pri, and the reader of the law of the most high God shall send for, they should give it him with speed,
20. To the sum of an hundred talents of silver: likewise also of wheat even to an hundred cores, and an hundred pieces of wine, and other things in abundance.
21. Let all things be performed after the law of God diligently to the most high God, that wrath come not upon the kingdom of the King and his sons.
22. I command you also that you require no tax, nor any other imposition of any of the Priests or Leuites, or holy singers, or porters, or ministers of the temple, or of any that have doings in this temple, and that no man have authority to impose any thing upon them.
23. And you, Esdras, according to the wisdom of God, ordain judges, and justices, that they may judge in all Syria and Phenice, all those that know the law of your God, and those that know it not you shall teach.
24. And whosoever shall transgress the law of your God, and of the king, shall be punished diligently, whether it be by death or other punishment, by penalty of money, or by imprisonment.
25. ¶ Then said Esdras the Scribe, Blessed be the only Lord God of my fathers, who has put these things into the heart of the king, to glorify his house that is in Jerusalem;
26. And has honoured me in the sight of the king and his counselors, and all his friends and Nobles.
27. Therefore was I encouraged, by the help of the Lord my God, and gathered together men of Israel to go up with me:
28. And these are the chief according to their families and several dignities, that went up with me from Babylon in the reign of king Artaxerxes.
29. Of the sons of Phinees, Gerson: of the sons of Ithamar, Gamael: of the sons of Dauid; Lettus the son of Sechenias:
30. Of the sons of Pharez, Zacharias, and with him were counted, an hundred and fifty men:
31. Of the sons of Pahath, Moab; Eliaonias, the son of Zaraias, and with him two hundred men:
32. Of the sons of Zathoe, Sechenias, the son of Iezelus, and with him three hundred men, Of the sons of Adin, Obeth the son of Jonathan, and with him two hundred and fifty men.
33. Of the sons of Elam, Josias son of Gotholias, and with him seventy men:
34. Of the sons of Saphatias, Zaraias son of Michael, and with him threescore and ten men:
35. Of the sons of Joab, Abadias son of Iezelus, and with him two hundred and twelve men:
36. Of the sons of Banid, Assalimoth son of Josaphias, and with him an hundred and threescore men:
37. Of the sons of Babi, Zacharias son of Bebai, and with him twenty and eight men:
38. Of the sons of Astath, Johannesson of Acatan, and with him an hundred and ten men:
39. Of the sons of Adonicam the last, and these are the names of them, Eliphalet, Jeuel, and Samaias and with them seventy men:
40. Of the sons of Bago, Uthi, the son of Istalcurus, and with him seventy men:
41. And these I gathered together to the river, called Theras, where we pitched our tents three days, and then I surveyed them.
42. But when I had found there, none of the priests and Leuites,
43. Then sent I to Eleazar and Iduel, and Masman,
44. And Alnathan, and Mamaias, and Ioribas, and Nathan, Eunatan, Zacharias, and Mosollamon principal men and learned.
45. And I bad them that they should go to Saddeus the captain, who was in the place of the treasury:
46. And commanded them that they should speak to Daddeus, and to his brethren, and to the treasurers in that place, to send us such men as might execute the Priests office in the house of the Lord.
47. And by the mighty hand of our Lord they brought to us skilful men of the sons of Moli, the son of Leui, the son of Israel, Asebebia and his sons and his brethren, who were eighteen.
48. And Asebia, and Annuus, and Osaias his brother of the sons of Channuneus, and their sons were twenty men.
49. And of the servants of the Temple whom Dauid had ordained, and the principal men, for the service of the Leuites (to wit) the servants of the Temple, two hundred and twenty, the catalogue of whose names were showed.
50. And there I vowed a fast to the young men before our Lord, to desire of him a prosperous journey, both for us, and them that were with us: for our children and for the cattle:
51. For I was ashamed to ask the king footmen, & horsemen, and conduct for safeguard against our adversaries:
52. For we had said to the king, that the power of the Lord our God, should be with them that seek him, to support them in all ways.
53. And again we besought our Lord, as touching these things, & found him favorable to us.
54. Then I separated twelve of the chief of the priests, Esebrias, & Assanias, and ten men of their brethren with them.
55. And I weighed them the gold, and the silver, and the holy vessels of the house of our Lord, which the king and his counsel, and the princes, and all Israel had given.
56. And when I had weighed it, I delivered to them six hundred and fifty talents of silver, and silver vessels of an hundred talents, and an hundred talents of gold,
57. And twenty golden vessels, and twelve vessels of brasse, even of fine brasse, glittering like gold.
58. And I said to them, Both you are holy to the Lord, and the vessels are holy, and the gold, and the silver isa vow to the Lord, the Lord of our fathers.
59. Watch you, and keep them till you deliver them to the chief of the priests and Leuites, and to the principal men of the families of Israel in Jerusalem into the chambers of the house of our God.
60. So the priests and the Leuites who had received the silver & the gold, and the vessels, brought them to Jerusalem into the Temple of the Lord.
61. And from the river Theras we departed the twelft day of the first month, and came to Jerusalem by the mighty hand of our Lord, which was with us: and from the beginning of our journey, the Lord delivered us from every enemy, and so we came to Jerusalem.
62. And when we had been there three days, the gold and silver that was weighed, was delivered in the house of our Lord on the fourth day to Marmoth the pri, the son of Iri.
63. And with him was Eleazar the son of Phinees, and with them were Josabad the son of Jesu, and Moeth the son of Sabban, Leuites: all was delivered them by number and weight.
64. And all the weight of them was written up the same hour.
65. Moreover they that were come out of the captivity offered sacrifice to the Lord God of Israel, even twelve bullocks for all Israel, fourscore and sixteen rams,
66. Threescore and twelve lambs, goates for a peace offering, twelve, all of them a sacrifice to the Lord.
67. And they delivered the kings commandments to the kings stewards, and to the governors of Coelosyria, and Phenice, and they honoured the people, and the Temple of God.
68. Now when these things were done, the rulers came to me, and said:
69. The nation of Israel, the princes, the priests, and Leuites have not put away from them the strange people of the land: nor the pollutions of the Gentiles, to wit, of the Chanaanites, Hittites, Pheresites, Iebusites, and the Moabites, Egyptians, and Edomites.
70. For both they, and their sons, have maried with their daughters, and the holy seed is mixed with the strange people of the land, and from the beginning of this matter, the rulers and the great men have been partakers of this iniquity.
71. And as soon as I had heard these things, I rent my clothes, and the holy garment, and pulled off the haire from off my head, and beard, and sate me down sad, and very heavy.
72. So all they that were then moved at the word of the Lord God of Israel, assembled to me, while I mourned for the iniquity: but I sate still full of heaviness, untill the evening sacrifice.
73. Then rising up from the fast with my clothes and the holy garment rent, and bowing my knees, and stretching forth my hands to the Lord:
74. I said, O Lord, I am confounded, and ashamed before your face;
75. For our sins are multiplied above our heads, and our ignorances have reached up to heaven.
76. For ever since the time of our fathers we have been and are in great sin, even to this day:
77. And for our sins and our fathers, we with our brethren, and our kings, and our priests, were given up to the Kings of the earth, to the sword, and to captivity, and for a pray with shame, to this day.
78. And now in some measure has mercy been showed to us, from you, O Lord, that there should be left us a root, and a name, in the place of your Sanctuary.
79. And to discover to us a light in the house of the Lord our God, and to give us food in the time of our servitude.
80. Yea, when we were in bondage, we were not forsaken of our Lord; but he made us gracious before the Kings of Persia, so that they gave us food;
81. Yea, and honoured the Temple of our Lord, and raised up the desolate Sion, that they have given us a sure abiding in Iury, and Jerusalem.
82. And now, O Lord, what shall we say having these things? for we have transgressed your commandments, which you gau by the hand of your servants the Prophets, saying,
83. That the land which you enter into to possess as an heritage, is a land polluted with the pollutions of the strangers of the land, and they have filled it with their uncleanness.
84. Therefore now shall you not join your daughters to their sons, neither shall you take their daughters to your sons.
85. Moreover you shall never seek to have peace with them, that you may be strong, and eat the good things of the land, and that you may leave the inheritance of the land to your children for evermore.
86. And all that is befallen, is done to us for our wicked works, and great sins: for you, O Lord, did make our sins light:
87. And did give to us such a root: but we have turned back again to transgress your Law, and to mingle ourselves with the uncleanness of the nations of the land.
88. Might not you be angry with us to destroy us, till you had left us neither root, seed, nor name?
89. O Lord of Israel, you are true: for we are left a root this day.
90. Behold, now are we before you in our iniquities, for we cannot stand any longer by reason of these things before you.
91. And as Esdras in his prayer made his confession, weeping, and lying flat upon the ground before the Temple, there gathered to him from Jerusalem, a very great multitude of men, and women, & children: for there was great weeping among the multitude.
92. Then Jechonias the son of Ieelus, one of the sons of Israel called out and said, O Esdras, we have sinned against the Lord God, we have maried strange women of the nations of the land, & now is all Israel aloft.
93. Let us make an oath to the Lord, that we will put away all our wives, which we have taken of the heathen, with their children,
94. Like as you have decreed, and as many as do obey the Law of the Lord.
95. Arise, and put in execution: for to you does this matter appertain, and we will be with you: do valiantly.
96. So Esdras arose, and took an oath of the chief of the priests, and Leuites of all Israel, to do after these things, and so they sware.1 Esdras|91. Then Esdras rising from the court of the Temple, went to the chamber of Joanan the son of Eliasib,
2. And remained there, and did eat no meat nor drink water, mourning for the great iniquities of the multitude.
3. And there was a proclamation in all Iury and Jerusalem, to all them that were of the captivity, that they should be gathered together at Jerusalem:
4. And that whosoever met not there within two or three days according as the Elders that bare rule, appointed, their cattle should be seized to the use of the Temple, and himself cast out from them that were of the captivity.
5. And in three days were all they of the tribe of Juda and Beniamin gathered together at Jerusalem the twentieth day of the ninth month.
6. And all the multitude sate trembling in the broad court of the Temple, because of the present fowl weather.
7. So Esdras arose up, and said to them, You have transgressed the law in marrying strange wives, by it to increase the sins of Israel.
8. And now by confessing give glory to the Lord God of our fathers,
9. And do his will, and separate yourselves from the heathen of the land, and from the strange women.
10. Then cryed the whole multitude, and said with a loud voice; Like as you have spoken, so will we do.
11. But since as the people are many, and it is fowl weather, so that we cannot stand without, and this is not a work of a day or two, seeing our sin in these things is spread far:
12. Therefore let the rulers of the multitude stay, and let all them of our habitations that have strange wives, come at the time appointed,
13. And with them the Rulers and Judges of every place, till we turn away the wrath of the Lord from us, for this matter.
14. Then Jonathan the son of Azael, and Ezechias the son of Theocanus, accordingly took this matter upon them: and Mosollam, and Leuis, and Sabbatheus helped them.
15. And they that were of the captivty, did according to all these things.
16. And Esdras the Pri chose to him the principal men of their families, all by name: and in the first day of the tenth month, they sate together to examine the matter.
17. So their cause that held strange wives, was brought to an end in the first day of the first month.
18. And of the Priests that were come together, and had strange wives, there were found:
19. Of the sons of Jesus the son of Josedec, and his brethren, Matthelas, and Eleazar, and Ioribus, and Joadanus.
20. And they gave their hands to put away their wives, & to offer rams, to make reconcilement for their errors.
21. And of the sons of Emmer, Ananias, and Zabdeus, and Eanes, and Sameivs, and Hierel, and Azarias.
22. And of the sons of Phaisur, Ellionas, Massias, Ismael, and Nathanael, and Oridelus, and Talsas.
23. And of the Leuites: Josabad, and Semis, and Colivs who was called Calitas, and Patheus, and Judas, and Jonas.
24. Of the holy Singers: Eleazurus, Bacchurus.
25. Of the Porters: Sallumus, and Tolbanes.
26. Of them of Israel, of the sons of Phoros, Hiermas, and Eddias, and Melchias, and Maelus, and Eleazar, and Asibias, and Baanias.
27. Of the sons of Ela, Matthanias, Zacharias, and Hierielus, and Hieremoth, and Aedias.
28. And of the sons of Zamoth, Eliadas, Elisimus, Othonias, Iarimoth, and Sabatus, and Sardeus.
29. Of the sons of Bebai, Johannes, and Ananias, and Josabad, and Amatheis.
30. Of the sons of Many, Olamus, Mamuchus, Iedeus, Iasubus, Iasael, and Hieremoth.
31. And of the sons of Addi, Naathus, and Moosias, Lacunus, and Naidus, and Mathanias, and Sesthel, Balunus, and Manasseas.
32. And of the sons of Annas, Elionas, and Aseas, and Milchias, and Sabbeus, and Simon Chosameus.
33. And of the sons of Asom, Altaneus, and Matthias, and Bannaia, Eliphalat, and Manasses, and Semei.
34. And of the sons of Maani, Jeremias, Momdis, Omaerus, Iuel, Mabdai, and Pelias, and Anos, Carabasion, and Enasibus, & Mamnitanaimus, Eliasis, Bannus, Eliali, Samis, Selenias, Nathanias: And of the sons of Ozora, Sesis, Esril, Azailus, Samatus, Zambis, Josiphus,
35. And of the sons of Ethma, Mazitias, Zabadaias, Edes, Iuel, Banaias.
36. All these had taken strange wives, and they put them away with their children.
37. And the priests, and Leuites, and they that were of Israel dwelt in Jerusalem, and in the country, in the first day of the seventh month: so the children of Israel were in their habitations.
38. And the whole multitude came together with one accord, into the broad place of the holy porch toward the East.
39. And they spoke to Esdras the pri and reader, that he would bring the law of Moses, that was given of the Lord God of Israel.
40. So Esdras the chief pri, brought the law to the whole multitude from man to woman, and to all the priests, to hear the law in the first day of the seventh month.
41. And he read in the broad court before the holy porch from morning to midday, before both men and women; and all the multitude gave heed to the law.
42. And Esdras the pri, and reader of the law stood up, upon a pulpit of wood which was made for that purpose.
43. And there stood up by him Matathias, Sammus, Ananias, Azarias, Urias, Ezecias, Balasamus, upon the right hand.
44. And upon his left hand stood Phaldaivs, Misael, Melchias, Lothasubus and Nabarias.
45. Then took Esdras the book of the law before the multitude: for he sate honorably in the first place in the sight of them all.
46. And when he opened the law, they stood all straight up. So Esdras blessed the Lord God most high, the God of hosts Almighty.
47. And all the people answered Amen, and lifting up their hands they fell to the ground, & worshiped the Lord.
48. Also Jesus, Anus, Sarabias, Adinus, Iacubus, Sabateus, Auteas, Maianeas, and Calitas, Azarias, and Joazabdus, and Ananias, Biatas, the Leuites taught the law of the Lord, making them with all to understand it.
49. Then spoke Attharates to Esdras the chief pri, and reader, and to the Leuites that taught the multitude, even to all, saying,
50. This day is holy to the Lord; for they all wept when they heard the law.
51. Go then and eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send part to them that have nothing.
52. For this day is holy to the Lord, and be not sorrowful; for the Lord will bring you to honor.
53. So the Leuites published all things to the people, saying: This day is holy to the Lord, be not sorrowful.
54. Then went they their way, every one to eat and drink, & make merry, and to give part to them that had nothing, and to make great cheer,
55. Because they understood the words in which they were instructed, and for the which they had bin assembled.