2 Esdras|11. The second book of the Prophet Esdras the son of Saraias, the son of Azarias, the son of Helchias, the son of Sadamias, the son of Sadoc, the son of Achitob,
2. The son of Achias, the son of Phinees, the son of Heli, the son of Amarias, the son of Aziei, the son of Marimoth, the son of Arna, the son of Ozias, the son of Borith, the son of Abisei, the son of Phinees, the son of Eleazar,
3. The son of Aaron, of the Tribe of Leui, which was captive in the land of the Medes, in the reign of Artaxerxes king of the Persians.
4. And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,
5. Go your way, and show my people their sinful deeds, and their children their wickedness which they have done against me, that they may tell their childrens children,
6. Because the sins of their fathers are increased in them: for they have forgotten me, & have offered to strange gods.
7. Am not I even he that brought them out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage? but they have provoked me to wrath, and despised my counsels.
8. Pull you off then the haire of your head, and cast all evil upon them, for they have not been obedient to my law, but it is a rebellious people.
9. How long shall I forbear them to who I have done so much good?
10. Many kings have I destroyed for their sakes, Pharao with his servants, and all his power have I smitten down.
11. All the nations have I destroyed before them, & in the East I have scattered the people of two provinces, even of Tyrus and Sidon, and have slain all their enemies.
12. speak you therefore to them saying, Thus says the Lord,
13. I led you through the Sea, and in the beginning gave you a large and safe passage, I gave you Moyses for a leader, and Aaron for a pri,
14. I gave you light in a pillar of fire, and great wonders have I done among you, yet have you forgotten me, says the Lord.
15. Thus says the Almighty Lord, The quails were as a token for you, I gave you tents for your safeguard, nevertheless you murmured there,
16. And triumphed not in my name for the destruction of your enemies, but ever to this day do you yet murmur.
17. Where are the benefits that I have done for you? when you were hungry and thirsty in the wilderness, did you not cry to me?
18. Saying, Why have you brought us into this wilderness to kill us? It had bin better for us to have served the Egyptians, then to die in this wilderness.
19. Then had I pity upon your mournings, and gave you Manna to eat, so you did eat Angels bread.
20. When you were thirsty, did I not cleave the rock, and waters flowed out to your fill? for the heat I covered you with the leaves of the trees.
21. I divided amongst you a fruitful land, I cast out the Canaanites, the Pherezites, and the Philistines before you: what shall I yet do more for you: says the Lord?
22. Thus says the Almighty Lord, when you were in the wilderness in the river of the Amorites, being athirst, and blaspheming my Name,
23. I gave you not fire for your blasphemies, but cast a tree in the water, and made the river sweet.
24. What shall I do to you, O Jacob? you Juda would not obey me: I will turn me to other nations, and to those will I give my Name, that they may keep my Statutes.
25. Seeing you have forsaken me, I will forsake you also: when you desire me to be gracious to you, I shall have no mercy upon you.
26. whensoever you shall call upon me, I will not hear you: for you have defiled your hands with blood, and your feet are swift to commit manslaughter.
27. You have not as it were forsaken me, but your own selves, says the Lord.
28. Thus says the Almighty Lord, Have I not prayed you as a father his sons, as a mother her daughters, and a nurse her young babes,
29. That you would be my people, and I shoud be your God, that you would be my children, and I should be your father?
30. I gathered you together, as a henne gathers her chickens under her wings: but now, what shall I do to you? I will cast you out from my face.
31. When you offer to me, I will turn my face from you: for your solemn feast days, your new Moon, and your circumcisions have I forsaken.
32. I sent to you my servants the Prophets, whom you have taken and slain, and torn their bodies in pieces, whose blood I will require of your hands, says the Lord.
33. Thus says the Almighty Lord, Your house is desolate, I will cast you out, as the wind does stubble.
34. And your children shall not be fruitful: for they have despised my commandment, and done the thing that is evil before me.
35. Your houses will I give to a people that shall come, which not having heard of me, yet shall believe me, to whom I have showed no signs, yet they shall do that I have commanded them.
36. They have seen no Prophets, yet they shall call their sins to remembrance, and acknowledge them.
37. I take to witness the grace of the people to come, whose little ones rejoice in gladness: and though they have not seen me with bodily eyes, yet in spirit they believe the thing that I say.
38. And now brother, behold what glory: and see the people that comes from the East.
39. Unto whom I will give for leaders, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Oseas, Amos, and Micheas, Ioel, Abdias, and Jonas,
40. Nahum, and Abacuc, Sophonias, Aggeus, Zachary, and Malachy, which is called also an Angel of the Lord.2 Esdras|21. Thus says the Lord, I brought this people out of bondage, and I gave them my commandments by my servants the prophets, whom they would not hear, but despised my counsels.
2. The mother that bare them, says to them, Go your way you children, for I am a widow, and forsaken.
3. I brought you up with gladness, but with sorrow and heaviness have I lost you: for you have sinned before the Lord your God, and done that thing that is evil before him.
4. But what shall I now do to you? I am a widow and forsaken: go your way, O my children, and ask mercy of the Lord.
5. As for me, O father, I call upon you for a witness over the mother of these children, which would not keep my covenant,
6. That you bring them to confusion, and their mother to a spoil, that there may be no off spring of them.
7. Let them be scattered abroad among the heathen, let their names be put out of the earth: for they have despised my covenant.
8. woe be to you Assur, you that hid the unrighteous in you, O you wicked people, remember what I did to Sodome and Gomorrhe.
9. Whose land lies in clods of pitch and heaps of ashes: even so also will I do to them that hear me not, says the Almighty Lord.
10. Thus says the Lord to Esdras, Tell my people that I will give them the kingdom of Hierusalem, which I would have given to Israel.
11. Their glory also will I take to me, and give these the everlasting Tabernacles, which I had prepared for them.
12. They shall have the tree of Life for an ointment of sweet savor, they shall nether labour, nor be weary.
13. Go and you shall receive: pray for few days to you, that they may be shortened: the kingdom is already prepared for you: Watch.
14. Take heaven and earth to witness; for I have broken the evil in pieces, and created the good; for I live, says the Lord.
15. Mother, embrace your children, and bring them up with gladness, make their feet as fast as a pillar: for I have chosen you, says the Lord.
16. And those that be dead will I raise up again from their places, and bring them out of the graves: for I have known my Name in Israel.
17. fear not you mother of the children: for I have chosen you, says the Lord.
18. For your help I will send my servants Esay and Jeremy, after whose counsel I have sanctified and prepared for you twelve trees, laden with divers fruits;
19. And as many fountains flowing with milk and honey: and seven mighty mountains, upon which there grow roses and lilies, by which I will fill your children with joy.
20. Do right to the widow, judge for the fatherless, give to the poor, defend the orphan, clothe the naked,
21. heal the broken and the weak, laugh not a lame man to scorn, defend the maimed, and let the blind man come into the sight of my cleareness.
22. keep the old and young within your walls.
23. Wheresover you find the dead, take them and bury them, and I will give you the first place in my resurrection.
24. Abide still, O my people, and take your rest, for your quietness shall come.
25. Nourish your children, O you good nource, establish their feet.
26. As for the servants whom I have given you, there shall not one of them perish; for I will require them from among your number.
27. Be not weary, for when the day of trouble and heaviness comes, others shall weep and be sorrowful, but you shall be merry, and have abundance.
28. The heathen shall envy you, but they shall be able to do nothing against you, says the Lord.
29. My hands shall cover you, so that your children shall not see hell.
30. Be joyful, O you mother, with your children, for I will deliver you, says the Lord.
31. Remember your children that sleep, for I shall bring them out of the sides of the earth, and show mercy to them: for I am merciful, says the Lord Almighty.
32. Embrace your children untill I come and show mercy to them: for my welles run over, and my grace shall not fail.
33. I Esdras received a charge of the Lord upon the mount Oreb, that I should go to Israel; but when I came to them, they set me at nought, and despised the commandment of the Lord.
34. And therefore I say to you, O you heathen, that hear and understand, look for your shepherd, he shall give you everlasting rest; for he is nigh at hand, that shall come in the end of the world.
35. Be ready to the reward of the kingdom, for the everlasting light shall shine upon you for evermore.
36. Flee the shadow of this world, receive the joyfulness of your glory: I testify my savior openly.
37. O receive the gift that is given you, and be glad, giving thanks to him that has called you to the heavenly kingdom.
38. Arise up and stand, behold the number of those that be sealed in the feast of the Lord:
39. Which are departed from the shadow of the world, and have received glorious garments of the Lord.
40. Take your number, O Sion, and shut up those of your that are clothed in white, which have fulfilled the Law of the Lord.
41. The number of your children whom you longedst for, is fulfilled: beseech the power of the Lord, that your people which have been called from the beginning, may be hallowed.
42. I Esdras saw upon the mount Sion a great people, whom I could not number, and they all praised the Lord with songs.
43. And in the midst of them there was a young man of a high stature, taller then all the rest, and upon every one of their heads he set crowns, and was more exalted, which I marveled at greatly.
44. So I asked the Angel, and said, Sir, what are these?
45. He answered, and said to me, These be they that have put off the mortal clothing, and put on the immortal, and have confessed the Name of God: now are they crowned, and receive palms.
46. Then said I to the Angel, What young person is it that crownes them, and gives them palms in their hands?
47. So he answered, and said to me, It is the son of God, whom they have confessed in the world. Then began I greatly to commend them, that stood so stiffly for the Name of the Lord.
48. Then the Angel said to me, Go your way, and tell my people what manner of things, and how great wonders of the Lord your God you have seen.2 Esdras|31. In the thirtieth year after the ruin of the city, I was in Babylon, and lay troubled upon my bed, and my thoughts came up over my heart.
2. For I saw the desolation of Sion, and the wealth of them that dwelt at Babylon.
3. And my spirit was sore moved, so that I began to speak words full of fear to the most High, and said,
4. O Lord, who bear rule, you spak at the beginning, when you did plant the earth (and that yourself alone) and commanded the people,
5. And gau a body to Adam without soul, which was the workmanship of your hands, & did breathe into him the breath of life, and he was made living before you.
6. And you ledd him into paradise, which your right hand had planted, before ever the earth came forward.
7. And to him you gau commandment to love your way, which he transgressed, and immediately you appointedst death in him, and in his generations, of whom came nations, tribes, people, and kindreds out of number.
8. And every people walked after their own will, and did wonderful things before you, and despised your commandments.
9. And again in process of time you brought the flood upon those that dwelt in the world, and destroyed them.
10. And it came to passe in every of them, that as death was to Adam, so was the flood to these.
11. Nevertheless one of them you left, namely Noah with his household, of whom came all righteous men.
12. And it happened, that when they that dwelt upo the earth began to multiply, and had gotten them many children, and were a great people, they began again to be more ungodly then the first.
13. Now when they lived so wickedly before you, you did choose you a man from among them, whose name was Abraham.
14. Him you loved, and to him only you showed your will:
15. And mad an everlasting covenant with him, promising him that you would never forsake his seed.
16. And to him, you gau Isahac, and to Isahac also you gau Jacob and Esau. As for Jacob you did choose him to you, and put by Esau: and so Jacob became a great multitude.
17. And it came to passe, that when you ledd his seed out of Egypt, you brought them up to the mount Sina.
18. And bowing the heavens, you did set fast the earth, mouedst the whole world, and mad the depth to tremble, and troubledst the men of that age.
19. And your glory went through four gates, of fire, and of earthquake, and of wind, and of cold, that you might give the law to the seed of Jacob, and diligence to the generation of Israel.
20. And yet took you not away from them a wicked heart, that your law might bring forth fruit in them.
21. For the first Adam bearing a wicked heart transgressed, and was overcome; and so be all they that are borne of him.
22. Thus infirmity was made permanent; and the law (also) in the heart of the people with the malignity of the root, so that the good departed away, and the evil abode still.
23. So the times passed away, and the years were brought to an end: then did you raise you up a servant, called Dauid,
24. Whom you commanded to build a city to your name, and to offer incense and oblations to you in it.
25. When this was done many years, then they that inhabited the city forsook you,
26. And in all things did even as Adam, and all his generations had done, for they also had a wicked heart.
27. And so you gau the city over into the hands of your enemies.
28. Are their deeds then any better that inhabit Babylon, that they should therefore have the dominion over Sion?
29. For when I came there, and had seen impieties without number, then my soul saw many evil doers in this thirtieth year, so that my heart failed me.
30. For I have seen how you suffer them sinning, and have spared wicked doers: and have destroyed your people, and have preserved your enemies, and have not signified it.
31. I do not remember how this way may be left: Are they then of Babylon better then they of Sion?
32. Or is there any other people that knows you besides Israel? or what generation has so believed your covenants as Jacob?
33. And yet their reward appears not, and their labour has no fruit: for I have gone here and there through the heathen, and I see that they flow in wealth, and think not upon your commandments.
34. Weigh you therefore our wickedness now in the balance, and theirs also that dwell in the world: and so shall your Name no where be found, but in Israel.
35. Or when was it that they which dwell upon the earth, have not sinned in your sight? or what people has so kept your commandments?
36. You shall find that Israel by name has kept your precepts: but not the heathen.2 Esdras|41. And the Angel that was sent to me, whose name was Uriel, gave me an answer,
2. And said, Your heart has gone too far in this world, and think you to comprehend the way of the most High?
3. Then said I, Yea my Lord: and he answered me and said, I am sent to show you three ways, and to set forth three similitudes before you.
4. Whereof if you can declare me one, I will show you also the way that you desir to see, & I shall show you from from where the wicked heart comes.
5. And I said, Tel on my Lord. Then said he to me, Go your way, weigh me the weight of the fire, or measure me the blast of the wind, or call me again the day that is past.
6. Then answered I and said, What man is able to do that, that you should ask such things of me?
7. And he said to me, If I should ask you how great dwellings are in the midst of the sea, or how many springs are in the beginning of the deep, or how many springs are above the firmament, or which are the outgoings of Paradise:
8. Perhaps you would say to me, I never went down into the deep, nor as yet into hell, neither did I ever climb up into heaven.
9. Nevertheless, now have I asked you but only of the fire and wind, and of the day where through you have passed, and of things fro which you can not be separated, and yet can you give me uo answeere of them.
10. He said moreover to me, Your own things, and such as are grown up with you, can you not know.
11. How should your vessel then be able to comprehend the way of the highest, and the world being now outwardly corrupted, to understand the corruption that is evident in my sight?
12. Then said I to him, It were better that we were not at all, then that we should live still in wickedness, and to suffer, and not to know therefore.
13. He answered me and said, I went into a forest into a plain, and the trees took counsel,
14. And said, Come, let us go and make war against the Sea, that it may depart away before us, and that we may make us more woods.
15. The floods of the Sea also in like manner took counsel, and said, Come, let us go up and subdue the woods of the plain, that there also we may make us another country.
16. The thought of the wood was in vain, for the fire came and consumed it.
17. The thought of the floods of the Sea came likewise to nought, for the sand stood up and stopped them.
18. If you were judge now betwixt these two, whom would you begin to justify, or whom would you condemn?
19. I answered and said, Uerily it is a foolish thought that they both have devised: for the ground is given to the wood, and the sea also has his place to bear his floods.
20. Then answered he me and said, You have given a right judgment, but why judg you not yourself also?
21. For like as the ground is given to the wood, & the sea to his floods: even so they that dwell upon the earth may understand nothing, but that which is upon the earth: and he that dwells above the heavens, may only understand the things that are above the height of the heavens.
22. Then answered I, and said, I beseech you, O Lord, let me have understanding.
23. For it was not my mind to be curious of the high things, but of such as passe by us daily, namely therefore Israel is given up as a reproach to the heathen, and for what cause the people whom you have loved, is given over to ungodly nations, and why the law of our forefathers is brought to nought, and the written covenants come to none effect.
24. And we passe away out of the world as grasshoppers, and our life is astonishment and fear, and we are not worthy to obtain mercy.
25. What will he then do to his Name, by which we are called? of these things have I asked.
26. Then answered he me, and said, The more you search, the more you shall marvel, for the world hastes fast to passe away,
27. And cannot comprehend the things that are promised to the righteous in time to come: for this world is full of unrighteousness and infirmities.
28. But as concerning the things whereof you ask me, I will tell you; for the evil is sowen, but the destruction of it is not yet come.
29. If therefore that which is sowen, be not turned upside down; and if the place where the evil is sowen passe not away, then cannot it come that is sowen with good.
30. For the grain of evil seed has been sowen in the heart of Adam from the beginning, and how much ungodliness has it brought up to this time? and how much shall it yet bring forth untill the time of threshing come.
31. Ponder now by yourself, how great fruit of wickedness the grain of evil seed has brought forth.
32. And when the ears shall be cut down, which are without number, how great a floor shall they fill?
33. Then I answered and said, How and when shall these things come to passe? therefore are our years few and evil?
34. And he answered me, saying, Do not you hasten above the most Highest: for your haste is in vain to be above him, for you have much exceeded.
35. Did not the souls also of the righteous ask question of these things in their chambers, saying, How long shall I hope on this fashion? when comes the fruit of the floor of our reward?
36. And to these things Uriel the Archangel gave them answer, and said, Even when the number of seedes is filled in you: for he has weighed the world in the balance.
37. By measure has he measured the times, and by number has he numbered the times; and he does not move nor stir them, untill the said measure be fulfilled.
38. Then answered I, and said, O Lord that bear rule, even we all are full of impiety.
39. And for our sakes perhaps it is that the floores of the righteous are not filled, because of the sins of them that dwell upon the earth.
40. So he answered me, and said, Go your way to a wman with child, and ask of her, when she has fulfilled her nine months, if her womb may keep the birth any longer within her?
41. Then said I, No Lord, that can she not. And he said to me, In the grave, the chambers of souls are like the womb of a woman:
42. For like as a woman that labors, makes haste to escape the necessity of the labor: even so do these places haste to deliver those things that are committed to them.
43. From the beginning look what you desir to see, it shall be showed you.
44. Then answered I, and said, If I have found favor in your sight, and if it be possible, and if I be meet therefore,
45. Show me then whether there be more to come then is past, or more past then is to come.
46. What is past I know; but what is for to come I know not.
47. And he said to me, Stand up upon the right side, and I shall expound the similitude to you.
48. So I stood and saw, and behold an hot burning oven passed by before me: and it happened that when the flame was gone by, I looked, and behold, the smoke remained still.
49. After this there passed by before me a watery cloud, and sent down much rain with a storm, and when the stormy rain was past, the drops remained still.
50. Then said he to me, Consider with yourself: as the rain is more then the drops, and as the fire is greater then the smoke: but the drops and the smoke remain behind: so the quantity which is past, did more exceed.
51. Then I prayed, and said, May I live, think you, untill that time? or what shall happen in those days?
52. He answered me, and said, As for the tokens whereof you ask me, I may tell you of them in part; but as touching your life, I am not sent to show you, for I do not know it.2 Esdras|51. Neuertheles as concerning the tokens, behold, the days shall come that they which dwell upon earth, shall be taken in a great number, and the way of truth shall be hidden, and the land shall be barren of faith.
2. But iniquity shall be increased above that which now you see, or that you have heard long ago.
3. And the land that you see now to have root, shall you see wasted suddenly.
4. But if the most high grant you to live, you shall see after the third trumpet, that the Sun shall suddenly shine again in the night, and the Moon thrice in the day.
5. And blood shall drop out of wood, and the stone shall give his voice, and the people shall be troubled.
6. And enen he shall rule whom they look not for that dwell upon the earth, and the fowls shall take their flight away together.
7. And the Sodomitish sea shall cast out fish, and make a noise in the night, which many have not known: but they shall all hear the voice of it.
8. There shall be a confusion also in many places, and the fire shall be often sent out again, and the wild beasts shall change their places, and menstruous women shall bring forth monsters.
9. And salt waters shall be found in the sweet, and all friends shall destroy one another: then shall wit hide itself, and understanding withdraw itself into his secret chamber,
10. And shall be sought of many, and yet not be found: then shall unrighteousness and incontinency be multiplyed upon earth.
11. One land also shall ask another, and say, Is righteousness that makes a man righteous, gone through you? And it shall say, No.
12. At the same time shall men hope, but nothing obtain: they shall labour, but their ways shall not prosper.
13. To show you such tokens I have leave: and if you will pray again, and weep as now, and fast seven days, you shall hear yet greater things.
14. Then I awaked, & an extreme fearfulness went through all my body, and my mind was troubled, so that it fainted.
15. So the Angel that was come to talk with me, held me, comforted me, and set me up upon my feet.
16. And in the second night it came to passe, that Salathiel the captain of the people came to me, saying, Where have you been? and why is your countenance so heavy?
17. know you not that Israel is committed to you, in the land of their captivity?
18. Up then, and eat bread, and forsake us not as the shepherd that leaves his flock in the hands of cruel wolves.
19. Then said I to him, Go your waies from me, and come not nigh me: And he heard what I said, and went from me.
20. And so I fasted seven days, monrning and weeping, like as Uriel the Angel commanded me.
21. And after seven days, so it was that the thoughts of my heart were very grievous to me again.
22. And my soul recovered the spirit of understanding, and I began to talk with the most high again,
23. And said, O Lord, that bear rule of every wood of the earth, and of all the trees of it, you have chosen you one only vine.
24. And of all lands of the whole world you have chosen you one pit: and of all the flowers of it, one Lily.
25. And of all the depths of the Sea, you have filled you one river: and of all builded cities, you have hallowed Sion to yourself.
26. And of all the fowls that are created, you have named you one Dove: and of all the cattle that are made, you have provided you one sheep.
27. And among all the multitudes of peoples, you have gotten you one people: and to this people whom you loved, you gau a law that is approved of all.
28. And now O Lord, why have you given this one people over to many? and upon the one root have you prepared others, and why have you scattered your only one people among many?
29. And they which did gainsay your promises, and believed not your covenants, have trodden them down.
30. If you did so much hate your people, yet should you punish them with your own hands.
31. Now when I had spoken these words, the Angell that came to me the night before, was sent to me,
32. And said to me, hear me, and I will instruct you, hearken to the thing that I say, & I shall tell you more.
33. And I said, speak on, my Lord: then said he to me, you are sore troubled in mind for Israels sake: lou you that people better then he that made them?
34. And I said, No Lord, but of very grief have I spoken: For my reins pain me every hour, while I labour to comprehend the way of the most High, and to seek out part of his judgment.
35. And he said to me, You can not: and I said, therefore Lord? wherunto was I borne then? or why was not my mothers womb then my grave, that I might not have seen the travel of Jacob, and the wearisome toil of the stock of Israel?
36. And he said to me, Number me the things that are not yet come, gather me together the drops that are scattered abroad, make me the flowers green again that are withered.
37. Open me the places that are closed, and bring me forth the winds that in them are shut up, show me the image of a voice: and then I will declare to you the thing that you labour to know.
38. And I said, O Lord, that bear rule, who may know these things, but he that has not his dwelling with men?
39. As for me, I am unwise: how may I then speak of these things whereof you ask me?
40. Then said he to me, Like as you can do none of these things that I have spoken of, even so can you not find out my judgment, or in the end the love that I have promised to my people.
41. And I said, behold, O Lord, yet are you nigh to them that be reserved till the end; and what shall they do that have been before me, or we (that be now) or they that shall come after us?
42. And he said to me, I will liken my judgment to a ring: like as there is no slackness of the last, even so there is no swiftness of the first.
43. So I answered and said, could you not make those that have been made, and be now, and that are for to come, at once, that you might show your judgment the sooner?
44. Then answered he me, and said, The creature may not have above the maker, neither may the world hold them at once that shall be created in it.
45. And I said, As you have said to your servant, that you which give life to all, have given life at once to the creature that you have created, and the creature bare it: even so it might now also bear them that now be present at once.
46. And he said to me, ask the womb of a woman, & say to her, If you bring forth children, why do you it not together, but one after another? pray her therefore to bring forth ten children at once.
47. And I said, She cannot: but must do it by distance of time.
48. Then said he to me, Even so have I given the womb of the earth to those that be sowen in it, in their times.
49. For like as a young child may not bring forth the things that belong to the aged, even so have I disposed the world which I created.
50. And I asked and said, Seeing you have now given me the way, I will proceed to speak before you: for our mother of whom you have told me that she is young, drawes now nigh to age.
51. He answered me and said, ask a woman that bears children, and she shall tell you.
52. Say to her, Therefore are not they whom you have now brought forth, like those that were before, but less of stature?
53. And she shall answer you, They that be borne in the strength of youth, are of one fashion, and they that are borne in the time of age (when the womb fails) are otherwise.
54. Consider you therefore also, how that you are less of stature then those that were before you.
55. And so are they that come after you less then you, as the creatures which now begin to be old, and have passed over the strength of youth.
56. Then said I, Lord, I beseech you, if I have found favor in your sight, show your servant by whom you visit your creature.2 Esdras|61. And he said to me, in the beginning when the earth was made, before the borders of the world stood, or ever the winds blew,
2. Before it thundered and lightened, or ever the foundations of Paradise were laid,
3. Before the fair flowers were seen, or ever the moveable powers were established, before the innumerable multitude of Angels were gathered together,
4. Or ever the heights of the aire were lifted up, before the measures of the firmament were named, or ever the chimnies in Sion were hot,
5. And ere the present years were sought out, and or ever the inventions of them that now sin were turned, before they were sealed that have gathered faith for a treasure:
6. Then did I consider these things, and they all were made through me alone, and through none other: by me also they shall be ended, & by none other.
7. Then answered I and said, What shall be the parting asunder of the times? or when shall be the end of the first, and the beginning of it that follows?
8. And he said to me, From Abraham to Isaac, when Jacob and Esau were borne of him, Iacobs hand held first the heel of Esau.
9. For Esau is the end of the world, and Jacob is the beginning of it that follows.
10. The hand of man is betwixt the heel and the hand: other question, Esdras, ask you not.
11. ¶ I answered then and said, O Lord that bear rule, if I have found favor in your sight,
12. I beseech you, show your servant the end of your tokens, whereof you showed me part the last night.
13. So he answered and said to me, Stand up upon your feet, and hear a mighty sounding voice.
14. And it shall be as it were a great motion, but the place where you stand, shall not be moved.
15. And therefore when it speaks be not afraid: for the word is of the end, and the foundation of the earth is understood.
16. And why? because the speech of these things trembles and is moved: for it knows that the end of these things must be changed.
17. And it happened that when I had heard it, I stood up upon my feet, and hearkened, & behold, there was a voice that spoke, and the sound of it was like the sound of many waters.
18. And it said, Behold, the days come, that I will begin to draw nigh, and to visit them that dwell upon the earth,
19. And will begin to make inquisition of them, what they be that have hurt unjustly with their unrighteousness, and when the affliction of Sion shall be fulfilled.
20. And when the world that shall begin to vanish away shall be finished: then will I show these tokens, the books shall be opened before the firmament, and they shall see all together.
21. And the children of a year old shall speak with their voices, the women with child shall bring forth untimely children, of three or four months old: and they shall live, and be raised up.
22. And suddenly shall the sowen places appear unsowen, the full storehouses shall suddenly be found empty.
23. And the trumpet shall give a sound, which when every man hears they shall be suddenly afraid.
24. At that time shall friendes fight one against another like enemies, and the earth shall stand in fear with those that dwell in it, the springs of the fountains shall stand still, and in three hours they shall not run.
25. whosoever remains from all these that I have told you, shall escape, and see my salvation, and the end of your world.
26. And the men that are received, shall see it, who have not tasted death from their birth: and the heart of the inhabitants shall be changed, and turned into another meaning.
27. For evil shall be put out, and deceit shall be quenched.
28. As for faith, it shall flourish, corruption shall be overcome, & the truth which has been so long without fruit, shall be declared.
29. And when he talked with me, behold, I looked by little and little upon him before whom I stood.
30. And these words said he to me, I am come to show you the time of the night to come.
31. If you will pray yet more, & fast seven daies again, I shall tel you greater things by day, then I have heard.
32. For your voice is heard before the most High: for the mighty has seen your righteous dealing, he has seen also your chastity, which you have had ever since your youth.
33. And therefore has he sent me to show you al these things, and to say to you, Be of good comfort, & fear not.
34. And hasten not with the times that are past, to think vain things, that you may not hasten from the latter times.
35. And it came to passe after this, that I wept again, and fasted seven days in like manner, that I might fulfill the three weeks which he told me.
36. And in the eight night was my heart vexed within me again, and I began to speak before the most High.
37. For my spirit was greatly set on fire, and my soul was in distress.
38. And I said, O Lord, you spak from the beginning of the creation, even the first day, & said thus, Let heaven and earth be made: and your word was a perfect work.
39. And then was the spirit, and darkness, and silence were on every side; the sound of mans voice was not yet formed.
40. Then commanded you a fair light to come forth of your treasures, that your work might appear.
41. Upon the second day you mad the spirit of the firmament, and commanded it to part asunder, and to make a division betwixt the waters, that the one part might go up, and the other remain beneath.
42. Upon the thirde day you did command that the waters should be gathered in the seventh part of the earth: six parts have you dried up and kept them, to the intent that of these some being planted of God and tilled, might serve you.
43. For as soon as your word went forth, the work was made.
44. For immediately there was great and innumerable fruit, and many and divers pleasures for the taste, & flowers of unchangeable color, and odours of wonderful smell: and this was done the third day.
45. Upon the fourth day you commanded that the Sun should shine, and the Moon give her light, and the stars should be in order,
46. And gau them a charge to do service to man, that was to be made.
47. Upon the fifth day, you saydst to the seventh part, where the waters were gathered, that it should bring forth living creatures, fowls and fishes: and so it came to passe.
48. For the dumb water, and without life, brought forth living things at the commandment of God, that al people might praise your wondrous works.
49. Then did you ordain two living creatures, the one you calledst Enoch, and the other Leuiathan,
50. And did separate the one from the other: for the seventh part (namely where the water was gathered together) might not hold them both.
51. Unto Enoch you gau one part which was dried up the third day, that he should dwell in the same part, in which are a thousand hills.
52. But to Leuiathan you gau the seventh part, namely the moist, and have kept him to be devoured of whom you will, and when.
53. Upon the sixth day you gau commandment to the earth, that before you it should bring forth beasts, cattle, and creeping things:
54. And after these, Adam also whom you mad lord of all your creatures, of him come we all, and the people also whom you have chosen.
55. All this have I spoken before you, O Lord, because you mad the world for our sakes.
56. As for the other people which also come of Adam, you have said that they are nothing, but be like to spittle, and have likened the abundance of them to a drop that falls from a vessel.
57. And now, O Lord, behold, these heathen, which have ever been reputed as nothing, have begun to be lordes over us, and to devour us:
58. But we your people (whom you have called your first borne, your only begotten, and your fervent lover) are given into their hands.
59. If the world now be made for our sakes, why do we not possess an inheritance with the world? how long shall this endure?2 Esdras|71. And when I had made an end of speaking these words, there was sent to me the Angel which had been sent to me the nights before.
2. And he said to me, Up Esdras, and hear the words that I am come to tell you.
3. And I said, speak on, my God. Then said he to me, The Sea is set in a wide place, that it might be deep and great.
4. But put the case the entrance were narrow, and like a river,
5. Who then could go into the Sea to look upon it, and to rule it? If he went not through the narrow, how could he come into the broad?
6. There is also another thing. A city is builded, and set upon a broad field, and is full of all good things.
7. The entrance of it is narrow, and is set in a dangerous place to fall, like as if there were a fire on the right hand, and on the left a deep water.
8. And one only path between them both, even between the fire and the water, so small that there could but one man go there at once.
9. If this city now were given to a man for an inheritance, if he never shall passe the danger set before it, how shall he receive this inheritance?
10. And I said, It is so, Lord. Then said he to me, Even so also is Israels portion:
11. Because for their sakes I made the world: and when Adam transgressed my Statutes, then was decreed that now is done.
12. Then were the entrances of this world made narrow, full of sorrow and labor: they are but few and evil, full of perils, and very painful.
13. For the entrances of the elder world were wide and sure, and brought immortal fruit.
14. If then they that live, labour not to enter these strait and vain things, they can never receive those that are laid up for them.
15. Now therefore why disquiet you yourself, seeing you are but a corruptible man? and why are you moved, whereas you are but mortal?
16. Why have you not considered in your mind this thing that is to come, rather then that which is present?
17. Then answered I, and said, O Lord, that bear rule, you have ordained in your Law, that the righteous should inherit these things, but that the ungodly should perish:
18. Nevertheless, the righteous shall suffer strait things, and hope for wide: for they that have done wickedly, have suffered the strait things, and yet shall not see the wide.
19. And he said to me, There is no judge above God, and none that has understanding above the highest.
20. For there be many that perish in this life, because they despise the law of God that is set before them.
21. For God has given strait commandment to such as came, what they should do to live, even as they came, and what they should observe to avoid punishment.
22. Nevertheless they were not obedient to him, but spoke against him, and imagined vain things:
23. And deceived themselves by their wicked deeds, and said of the most Hie, that he is not, and knew not his waies.
24. But his Law have they despised, and denied his covenants in his statutes have they not been faithful, and have not performed his works.
25. And therefore Esdras, for the empty, are empty things, and for the full, are the full things.
26. Behold, the time shall come, that these tokens which I have told you, shall come to passe, and the bride shall appear, and she coming forth shall be seen, that now is withdrawen from the earth.
27. And whosoever is delivered from the foresaid evils, shall see my wonders.
28. For my son Jesus shall be revealed with those that be with him, and they that remain shall rejoice within four hundred years.
29. After these years shall my son Christ die, and all men that have life.
30. And the world shall be turned into the old silence seven days, like as in the former judgments: so that no man shall remain.
31. And after seven days, the world that yet awakes not shall be raised up, and that shall die, that is corrupt.
32. And the earth shall restore those that are asleep in her, and so shall the dust those that dwell in silence, and the secret places shall deliver those souls that were committed to them.
33. And the most high shall appear upon the seat of judgment, and misery shall passe away, and the long suffering shall have an end.
34. But judgment only shall remain, truth shall stand, and faith shall wax strong.
35. And the work shall follow, and the reward shall be showed, and the good deeds shall be of force, and wicked deeds shall bear no rule.
36. Then said I, Abraham prayed first for the Sodomites, and Moses for the fathers that sinned in the wilderness:
37. And Jesus after him for Israel in the time of Achan,
38. And Samuel; and Dauid for the destruction: and Solomon for them that should come to the sanctuary.
39. And Helias for those that received rain, & for the dead that he might live.
40. And Ezechias for the people in the time of Sennacherib: and many for many.
41. Even so now seeing corruption is grown up, and wickedness increased, and the righteous have prayed for the ungodly: therefore shall it not be so now also?
42. He answered me and said, This present life is not the end where much glory does abide; therefore have they prayed for the weak.
43. But the day of doom shall be the end of this time, and the beginning of the immortality for to come, in which corruption is past.
44. Intemperancy is at an end, infidelity is cut off, righteousness is grown, and truth is sprung up.
45. Then shall no man be able to save him that is destroyed, nor to oppress him that has gotten the victory.
46. I answered then and said, This is my first and last saying; that it had been better not to have given the earth to Adam: or else when it was given him, to have restrained him from sinning.
47. For what profit is it for men now in this present time to live in heaviness, and after death to look for punishment?
48. O you Adam, what have you done? for though it was you that sinned, you are not fallen alone, but we all that come of you.
49. For what profit is it to us, if there be promised us an immortal time, whereas we have done the works that bring death?
50. And that their is promised us an everlasting hope, whereas ourselves being most wicked are made vain?
51. And that there are laid up for us dwellings of health and safety, whereas we have lived wickedly?
52. And that the glory of the most high is kept to defend them which have led a wary life, whereas we have walked in the most wicked ways of all?
53. And that there should be showed a paradise whose fruit endures for ever, in which is security and medicine, sith we shall not enter into it?
54. For we have walked in unpleasant places.
55. And that the faces of them which have used abstinence, shall shine above the stars, whereas our faces shall be blacker then darkness?
56. For while we lived and committed iniquity, we considered not that we should begin to suffer for it after death.
57. Then answered he me and said, This is the condition of the battle, which man that is borne upon the earth shall fight,
58. That if he be overcome, he shall suffer as you have said, but if he get the victory, he shall receive the thing that I say.
59. For this is the life whereof Moses spoke to the people while he lived, saying, Choose you life that you may live.
60. Nevertheless they believed not him, nor yet the prophets after him, no nor me which have spoken to them,
61. That there should not be such heaviness in their destruction, as shall be joy over them that are persuaded to salvation.
62. I answered then and said, I know, Lord, that the most Hie is called merciful, in that he has mercy upon them, which are not yet come into the world,
63. And upon those also that turn to his Law,
64. And that he is patient, and long suffers those that have sinned, as his creatures,
65. And that he is bountiful, for he is ready to give where it needs,
66. And that is of great mercy, for he multiplies more and more mercies to them that are present, and that are past, & also to them which are to come.
67. For if he shall not multiply his mercies, the world would not continue with them that inherit in it.
68. And he pardones; for if he did not so of his goodness, that they which have committed iniquities might be eased of them, the ten thousand part of men should not remain living.
69. And being Judge, if he should not forgive them that are cured with his word, and put out the multitude of contentions,
70. There should be very few left perhaps in an innumerable multitude.2 Esdras|81. And he answered me, saying, The most High has made this world for many, but the world to come for few.
2. I will tell you a similitude, Esdras, As when you ask the earth, it shall say to you, that it gives much mold of which earthen vessels are made, but little dust that gold comes of: even so is the course of this present world.
3. There be many created, but few shall be saved.
4. So answered I and said, Swallow then down O my soul, understanding, and devour wisdom.
5. For you have agreed to give ear, and are willing to prophecy: for you have no longer space then only to live.
6. O Lord, if you suffer not your servant that we may pray before you, and you give us seed to our heart, and culture to our understanding, that there may come fruit of it, howe shall each man live that is corrupt, who bears the place of a man?
7. For you are alone, and we all one workmanship of your hands, like as you have said.
8. For when the body is fashioned now in the mothers womb, and you give it members, your creature is preserved in fire & water, and nine months does your workmanship endure your creature which is created in her.
9. But that which keeps, and is kept, shall both be preserved: and when the time comes, the womb preserved, delivers up the things that grew in it.
10. For you have commanded out of the parts of the body, that is to say, out of the breasts milk to be given, which is the fruit of the breasts,
11. That the thing which is fashioned, may be nourished for a time, till you dispos it to your mercy.
12. You brought it up with your righteousness, and nourturedst it in your Law, and reformedst it with your judgment.
13. And you shall mortify it as your creature, and quicken it as your work.
14. If therefore you shall destroy him which with so great labour was fashioned, it is an easy thing to be ordained by your commandment, that the thing which was made might be preserved.
15. Now therefore, Lord, I will speak (touchivg man in general, you know best) but touching your people, for whose sake I am sory,
16. And for your inheritance, for whose cause I mourn, and for Israel, for whom I am heavy, and for Jacob, for whose sake I am troubled:
17. Therefore will I begin to pray before you, for myself, and for them: for I see the falles of us that dwell in the land.
18. But I have heard the swiftness of the Judge which is to come.
19. Therefore hear my voice, and understand my words, and I shall speak before you: this is the beginning of the words of Esdras, before he was taken up: and I said;
20. O Lord, You that dwell in euerlastingnes, which behold from above, things in the heaven, & in the aire,
21. Whose Throne is inestimable, whose glory may not be comprehended, before whom the hosts of Angels stand with trembling,
22. (Whose service is conversant in wind and fire,) whose word is true, and sayings constant, whose commandment is strong, and ordinance fearful,
23. Whose look dries up the depths, and indignation makes the mountains to melt away, which the truth witnesses:
24. O hear the prayer of your servant, and give ear to the petition of your creature.
25. For while I live, I will speak, and so long as I have understanding, I will answer.
26. O look not upon the sins of your people: but on them which serve you in truth.
27. Regard not the wicked inventions of the heathen: but the desire of those that keep your Testimonies in afflictions.
28. think not upon those that have walked feignedly before you: but remember them, which according to your will have known your fear.
29. Let it not be your will to destroy them, which have lived like beasts: but to look upon them that have clearly taught your Law.
30. Take you no indignation at them which are deemed worse then beasts: but love them that alway put their trust in your righteousness, and glory.
31. For we and our fathers do languish of such diseases; but because of us sinners, you shall be called merciful.
32. For if you have a desire to have mercy upon us, you shall be called merciful, to us namely, that have no works of righteousness.
33. For the just which have many good works layed up with you, shall out of their own deeds receive reward.
34. For what is man that you should take displeasure at him? or what is a corruptible generation, that you should be so bitter toward it?
35. For in truth there is no man among them that be borne, but he has dealt wickedly, and among the faithful, there is none which has not done amiss.
36. For in this, O Lord, your righteousness, and your goodness shall be declared, if you be merciful to them which have not the confidence of good works.
37. Then answered he me, and said, Some things have you spoken aright, and according to your words it shall be.
38. For indeed I will not think on the disposition of them which have sinned before death, before judgment, before destruction.
39. But I will rejoice over the disposition of the righteous, and I will remember also their pilgrimage, and the salvation, and the reward that they shall have.
40. Like as I have spoken now, so shall it come to passe.
41. For as the husbandmau sows much seed upon the ground, and plants many trees, and yet the thing that is sowen good in his season, comes not up, neither does all that is planted take root: even so is it of them that are sowen in the world, they shall not all be saved.
42. I answered then, and said, If I have found grace, let me speak.
43. Like as the husbandmans seed perishes, if it come not up, and receive not the rain in due season, or if there come too much rain and corrupt it:
44. Even so perishes man also which is formed with your hands, and is called your own image, because you are like to him, for whose sake you have made all things, and likened him to the husbandmans seed.
45. Be not wroth with us, but spare your people, and have mercy upon your own inheritance: for you are merciful to your creature.
46. Then answered he me, and said, Things present are for the present, and things to come, for such as be to come.
47. For you come far short, that you should be able to love my creature more then I: but I have often times drawen nigh to you, and to it, but never to the unrighteous.
48. In this also you are marvelous before the most high;
49. In that you have humbled yourself as it becomes you, and have not judged yourself worthy to be much glorified among the righteous.
50. For many great miseries shall be done to them, that in the latter time shall dwell in the world, because they have walked in great pride.
51. But understand you for yourself, and seek out the glory for such as be like you.
52. For to you is Paradise opened, the tree of life is planted, the time to come is prepared, plenteousness is made ready, a city is builded, and rest is allowed, yea perfect goodness and wisdom.
53. The root of evil is sealed up from you, weakness and the moth is hid from you, and corruption is fled into hell to be forgotten.
54. Sorrows are passed, & in the end is showed the treasure of immortality.
55. And therefore ask you no more questions concerning the multitude of them that perish.
56. For when they had taken liberty, they despised the most High, thought scorn of his law, and forsook his ways.
57. Moreover, they have troden down his righteous,
58. And said in their heart, that there is no God, yea and that knowing they must die.
59. For as the things aforesaid shall receive you, so thirst and pain are prepared for them; for it was not his will that men should come to nought.
60. But they which be created, have defiled the Name of him that made them, and were unthankful to him which prepared life for them.
61. And therefore is my judgment now at hand.
62. These things have I not showed to all men, but to you, and a few like you. Then answered I, and said,
63. Behold, O Lord, now have you showed me the multitude of the wonders which you will begin to do in the last times: but at what time, you have not showed me.2 Esdras|91. He answered me then, and said, measure you the time diligently in itself: and when you see part of the signs past, which I have told you before,
2. Then shall you understand, that it is the very same time, in which the highest will begin to visite the world which he made.
3. Therefore when there shall be seen earthquakes and uproars of the people in the world:
4. Then shall you wel understand, that the most high spoke of those things from the days that were before you, even from the beginning.
5. For like as all that is made in the world has a beginning, and an end, and the end is manifest:
6. Even so the times also of the highest, have plain beginnings in wonders and powerful works, and endings in effects and signs.
7. And every one that shall be saved, and shall be able to escape by his works, and by faith, by which you have believed,
8. Shall be preserved from the said perils, and shall see my salvation, in my land, and within my borders: for I have sanctified them for me, from the beginning.
9. Then shall they be in pitiful case which now have abused my ways: and they that have cast them away desspitefully, shall dwell in torments.
10. For such, as in their life have received benefits, & have not known me:
11. And they that have loathed my law, while they had yet liberty, and when as yet place of repentance was open to them, understood not, but despised it:
12. The same must know it after death by pain.
13. And therefore be you not curious, how the ungodly shall be punished and when: but enquire how the righteous shall be saved, whose the world is, and for whom the world is created.
14. Then answered I, and said,
15. I have said before, and now do speak, and will speak it also hereafter: that there be many moe of them which perish, then of them which shall be saved,
16. Like as a wave is greater then a drop.
17. And he answered me, saying: like as the field is, so is also the seed: as the flowers be, such are the colors also: such as the workman is, such also is the work: and as the husbandman is himself, so is his husbandry also: for it was the time of the world.
18. And now when I prepared the world, which was not yet made, even for them to dwell in that now live, no man spoke against me.
19. For then every one obeyed, but now the manners of them which are created in this world that is made, are corrupted by a perpetual seed, & by a law which is unsearchable, rid themselves.
20. So I considered the world, and behold there was peril, because of the devices that were come into it.
21. And I saw and spared it greatly, and have kept me a grape of the cluster, and a plant of a great people.
22. Let the multitude perish then, which was borne in vain, and let my grape be kept and my plant: for with great labour have I made it perfect.
23. Nevertheless if you will cease yet seven days moe (but you shall not fast in them.)
24. But go into a field of flowers, where no house is builded, and eat only the flowers of the field, Tast no flesh, drink no wine, but eat flowers only.
25. And pray to the Highest continually, then will I come and talk with you.
26. So I went my way into the field which is called Ardath, like as he commanded me, and there I sate amongst the flowers, and did eat of the herbs of the field, and the meat of the same satisfied me.
27. After seven days I sate upon the grass, and my heart was vexed within me, like as before.
28. And I opened my mouth, and began to talk before the most High and said,
29. O Lord, you that show yourself to us, you were showed to our fathers in the wilderness, in a place where no man treades, in a barren place when they came out of Egypt.
30. And you spak, saying, hear me, O Israel, and mark my words, you seed of Jacob.
31. For behold I sow my law in you, and it shall bring fruit in you, and you shall be honoured in it for ever.
32. But our fathers which received the law, kept it not, and observed not your ordinances, and though the fruit of your law did not perish, neither could it, for it was your:
33. Yet they that received it, perished, because they kept not the thing that was sowen in them.
34. And lo, it is a custom when the ground has received seed, or the Sea a ship, or any vessel, meat or drink, that, that being perished in which it was sowen, or cast into,
35. That thing also which was sowen or cast in it, or received, does perish, and remains not with us: but with us it has not happened so.
36. For we that have received the law perish by sin, and our heart also which received it.
37. Nevertheless the law perishes not, but remains in his force.
38. And when I spoke these things in my heart, I looked back with mine eyes, & upon the right side I saw a woman, and behold, she mourned, & wept with a loud voice, and was much grieved in heart, and her clothes were rent, and she had ashes upon her head.
39. Then let I my thoughts go that I was in, and turned me to her,
40. And said to her, Therefore weep you? why are you so grieved in your mind?
41. And she said to me, Sir, let me alone, that I may bewail myself, and add to my sorrow, for I am sore vexed in my mind, and brought very low.
42. And I said to her, What ailes you? Tell me.
43. She said to me, I your servant have been barren, and had no child, though I had an husband thirty yeres.
44. And those thirty years I did nothing else day and night, and every hour, but make my prayer to the highest.
45. After thirty years, God heard me your handmaid, looked upon my misery, considered my trouble, and gave me a son: and I was very glad of him, so was my husband also, and all my neighbours, and we gave great honor to the Almighty.
46. And I nourished him with great labor.
47. So when he grew up, and came to the time that he should have a wife, I made a feast.2 Esdras|101. And it so came to passe, that when my son was entered into his wedding chamber, he fell down and died.
2. Then we all overthrew the lights, and all my neighbours rose up to comfort me, so I took my rest to the second day at night.
3. And it came to passe when they had all left off to comfort me, to the end I might be quiet: then rose I up by night and fled, and came here into this field, as you see.
4. And I do now purpose not to return into the city, but here to stay, and neither to eat nor drink, but continually to mourn, & to fast until I die.
5. Then left I the meditations in which I was, and spoke to her in anger, saying,
6. You foolish woman above all other, see you not our mourning, and what happenes to us?
7. How that Sion our mother is full of all heaviness, and much humbled, mourning very sore?
8. And now seeing we all mourn, and are sad, for we are all in heaviness, are you grieved for one son?
9. For ask the earth, and she shall tell you, that it is she, which ought to mourn, for the fall of so many that grow upon her.
10. For out of her came all at the first, and out of her shall all others come: and behold they walk almost all into destruction, and a multitude of them is utterly rooted out.
11. Who then should make more mourning, then she that has lost so great a multitude, and not you which are sory but for one?
12. But if you say to me, My lamentation is not like the earths, because I have lost the fruit of my womb, which I brought forth with pains, and bare with sorrows.
13. But the earth not so: for the multitude present in it, according to the course of the earth, is gone, as it came.
14. Then say I to you, Like as you have brought forth with labour: even so the earth also has given her fruit, namely man, ever sithence the beginning, to him that made her.
15. Now therefore keep your sorrow to yourself, and bear with a good courage that which has befallen you.
16. For if you shall acknowledge the determination of God to be just, you shall both receive your son in time, and shall be commended amongst women.
17. Go your way then into the city, to your husband.
18. And she said to me, That will I not do: I will not go into the city, but here will I die.
19. So I proceeded to speak further to her, and said,
20. Do not so, but be counselled by me: for how many are the adversities of Sion? Be comforted in regard of the sorrow of Jerusalem.
21. For you see that our Sanctuary is laid waste, our Altar broken down, our Temple destroyed.
22. Our Psaltery is laid on the ground, our song is put to silence, our rejoicing is at an end, the light of our candlestick is put out, the Arke of our covenant is spoiled, our holy things are defiled, and the Name that is called upon us, is almost profaned: our children are put to shame, our priests are burnt, our Leuites are gone into captivity, our virgines are defiled, and our wives ravished, our righteous men caried away, our little ones destroyed, our young men are brought in bondage, and our strong men are become weak.
23. And which is the greatest of all, the seal of Sion has now lost her honor: for she is delivered into the hands of them that hate us.
24. And therefore shake off your great heaviness, and put away the multitude of sorrows, that the mighty may be merciful to you again, and the highest shall give you rest, and ease from your labour.
25. And it came to passe while I was talking with her, behold her face upon a sudden shined exceedingly, & her countenance glistered, so that I was afraid of her, and mused what it might be.
26. And behold suddenly, she made a great cry very fearful: so that the earth shook at the noise of the woman.
27. And I looked, and behold, the woman appeared to me no more, but there was a city builded, and a large place showed itself from the foundations: then was I afraid, and cried with a loud voice, and said,
28. Where is Uriel the Angel, who came to me at the first? for he has caused me to fall into many trances, and mine end is turned into corruption, and my prayer to rebuke.
29. And as I was speaking these words, behold, he came to me, and looked upon me.
30. And lo, I lay as one that had been dead, & mine understanding was taken from me, and he took me by the right hand, and comforted me, and set me upon my feet, and said to me,
31. What ailes you? and why are you so disquieted, and why is your understanding troubled, & the thoughts of your heart?
32. And I said, because you have forsaken me, and yet I did according to your words, and I went into the field, and lo I have seen, and yet see, that I am not able to express.
33. And he said to me, Stand up manfully, and I will advise you.
34. Then said I, speak on, my lord in me, only forsake me not, lest I die frustrate of my hope.
35. For I have seen, that I knew not, and hear that I do not know.
36. Or, is my sense deceived, or my soul in a dream?
37. Now therefore, I beseech you, that you will show your servant of this visio.
38. He answered me then, & said, hear me, and I shall inform you, and tell you therefore you are afraid: for the highest will reveal many secret things to you.
39. He has seen that your way is right: for that you sorrow continually for your people, and mak great lamentation for Sion.
40. This therefore is the meaning of the vision which you lately saw.
41. You saw a woman mourning, and you began to comfort her:
42. But now see you the likeness of the woman no more, but there appeared to you a city builded.
43. And whereas she told you of the death of her son, this is the solution.
44. This woman whom you saw, is Sion: and whereas she said to you (even she whom you see as a city builded.)
45. Whereas I say, she said to you, that she has been thirty yeres barren: those are the thirty years in which there was no offering made in her.
46. But after thirty years, Solomon builded the city, & offered offerings: and then bare the barren a son.
47. And whereas she told you that she nourished him with labour: that was the dwelling in Hierusalem.
48. But whereas she said to you, That my son coming into his marriage chamber, happened to have a fall, and died, this was the destruction that came to Hierusalem.
49. And behold, you saw her likeness, and because she mourned for her son, you began to comfort her, and of these things which have chanced, these are to be opened to you.
50. For now the most High sees, that you are grieved unfeignedly, & suffer from your whole heart for her, so has he showed you the brightness of her glory, and the comeliness of her beauty.
51. And therefore I bad you remain in the field, where no house was builded.
52. For I knew that the Highest would show this to you.
53. Therefore I commanded you to go into the field, where no foundation of any building was.
54. For in the place in which the Highest begins to show his city, ther can no mans building be able to stand.
55. And therefore fear not, let not your heart be affrighted, but go your way in, and see the beauty and greatness of the building, as much as your eyes be able to see:
56. And then shall you hear as much as your ears may comprehend.
57. For you are blessed above many other, and are called with the highest, and so are but few.
58. But to morrow at night you shall remain here.
59. And so shall the highest show you visions of the high things, which the most high will do to them, that dwell upon earth in the last days. So I slept that night and another, like as he commanded me.2 Esdras|111. Then saw I a dream, and behold, there came up from the Sea an Eagle, which had twelve feathered wings, & three heads.
2. And I saw, and behold, she spread her wings over all the earth, and all the winds of the air blew on her, and were gathered together.
3. And I beheld, and out of her feathers there grew other contrary feathers, and they became little feathers, and small.
4. But her heads were at rest: the head in the midst was greater then the other, yet rested it with the residue.
5. Moreover I beheld, and lo, the Eagle flew with her feathers, and reigned upon earth, and over them that dwelt in it.
6. And I saw that all things under heaven were subject to her, and no man spoke against her, no not one creature upon earth.
7. And I beheld, and lo, the Eagle rose upon her talents, and spoke to her feathers, saying,
8. Watch not all at once, sleep every one in his own place, & watch by course.
9. But let the heads be preserved for the last.
10. And I beheld, and lo, the voice went not out of her heads, but from the midst of her body.
11. And I numbered her contrary feathers, and behold, there were eight of them.
12. And I looked, and behold, on the right side there arose one feather, and reigned over all the earth.
13. And so it was, that when it reigned, the end of it came, and the place of it appeared no more: so the next following stood up and reigned, and had a great time.
14. And it happened, that when it reigned, the end of it came also, like as the first, so that it appeared no more.
15. Then came there a voice to it, and said,
16. hear, you that have borne rule over the earth so long: this I say to you, before you begin to appear no more.
17. There shall none after you attain to your time, neither to the half of it.
18. Then arose the third, and reigned as the other before: and appeared no more also.
19. So went it with all the residue one after another, as that every one reigned, and then appeared no more.
20. Then I beheld, & lo, in process of time, the feathers that followed, stood up upon the right side, that they might rule also, and some of them ruled, but within a while they appeared no more:
21. For some of them were set up, but ruled not.
22. After this I looked, and behold, the twelve feathers appeared no more, nor the two little feathers:
23. And there was no more upon the Eagles body, but three heads that rested, and six little wings.
24. Then saw I also that two little feathers divided themselves from the six, and remained under the head, that was upon the right side: for the four continued in their place.
25. And I beheld, & lo, the feathers that were under the wing, thought to set up themselves, and to have the rule.
26. And I beheld, & lo, there was one set up, but shortly it appeared no more.
27. And the second was sooner away then the first.
28. And I beheld, and lo, the two that remained, thought also in themselves to reign.
29. And when they so thought, behold, there awaked one of the heads that were at rest, namely it that was in the midst, for that was greater then the two other heads.
30. And then I saw, that the two other heads were joined with it.
31. And behold, the head was turned with them that were with it, and did eat up the two feathers under the wing that would have reigned.
32. But this head put the whole earth in fear, and bare rule in it over all those that dwelt upon the earth, with much oppression, and it had the governance of the world more then all the wings that had been.
33. And after this I beheld, and lo the head that was in the midst, suddenly appeared no more, like as the wings.
34. But there remained the two heads, which also in like sort ruled upon the earth, and over those that dwelt in it.
35. And I beheld, and lo, the head upon the right side, devoured it, that was upon the left side.
36. Then I heard a voice, which said to me, look before you, and consider the thing that you see.
37. And I beheld, and lo, as it were a roaring Lyon, chased out of the wood: and I saw that he sent out a mans voice to the Eagle, and said,
38. hear you, I will talk with you, and the highest shall say to you,
39. Are not you it that remain of the four beasts, whom I made to reign in my world, that the end of their times might come through them?
40. And the fourth came and overcame all the beasts that were past, and had power over the world with great fearfulness, and over the whole compass of the earth with much wicked oppression, and so long time dwelt he upon the earth with deceit.
41. For the earth have you not judged with truth.
42. For you have afflicted the meek, you have hurt the peaceable, you have loved liars, and destroyed the dwellings of them that brought forth fruit, and have cast down the walls of such, as did you no harm.
43. Therefore is your wrongful dealing come up to the Highest, and your pride to the Mighty.
44. The Highest also has looked upon the proud times, and behold, they are ended, and his abominations are fulfilled.
45. And therefore appear no more you Eagle, nor your horrible wings, nor your wicked feathers, nor your malicious heads, nor your hurtful clawes, nor all your vain body:
46. That all the earth may be refreshed, and may return, being delivered from your violence, and that she may hope for the judgment, and mercy of him that made her.2 Esdras|121. And it came to passe whiles the Lyon spoke these words to the Eagle, I saw:
2. And behold, the head that remained, and the four wings appeared no more, and the two went to it, and set themselves up to reign, and their kingdom was small and full of uproar.
3. And I saw, and behold, they appeared no more, and the whole body of the Eagle was burnt, so that the earth was in great fear: then awaked I out of the trouble and trance of my mind, and from great fear, and said to my spirit,
4. Lo, this have you done to me, in that you search out the ways of the Highest.
5. Lo, yet am I weary in my mind, and very weak in my spirit: and little strength is there in me; for the great fear, with which I was affrighted this night.
6. Therefore will I now beseech the Highest, that he will comfort me to the end.
7. And I said, Lord, that bear rule, If I have found grace before your sight, and if I am justified with you, before many others, and if my prayer indeed be come up before your face,
8. Comfort me then, and show me your servant the interpretation, and plain difference of this fearful vision, that you maist perfectly comfort my soul.
9. For you have judged me worthy, to show me the last times.
10. And he said to me, This is the interpretation of the vision.
11. The Eagle whom you saw come up from the sea, is the kingdom which was seen, in the vision of your brother Daniel.
12. But it was not expounded to him, therefore now I declare it to you.
13. Behold, the days will come, that there shall rise up a kingdom upon earth, and it shall be feared above all the kingdoms that were before it.
14. In the same shall twelve kings reign, one after another.
15. Whereof the second shall begin to reign, and shall have more time then any of the twelve.
16. And this do the twelve wings signify which you saw.
17. As for the voice which you heard speak, and that you saw not to go out from the heads, but from the mids of the body of it, this is the interpretation:
18. That after the time of that kingdom, there shall arise great strivings, and it shall stand in peril of falling: nevertheless it shall not then fall, but shall be restored again to his beginning.
19. And whereas you saw the eight small under feathers sticking to her wings, this is the interpretation:
20. That in him there shall arise eight kings, whose time shall be but small, and their years swift.
21. And two of them shall perish: the middle time approaching, four shall be kept untill their end begin to approach: but two shall be kept to the end.
22. And whereas you saw three heads resting, this is the interpretation
23. In his last days shall the most High raise up three kingdoms, and renew many things in it, and they shall have the dominion of the earth,
24. And of those that dwell in it with much oppression, above all those that were before them: therefore are they called the heads of the Eagle.
25. For these are they that shall accomplish his wickedness, and that shall finish his last end.
26. And whereas you saw that the great head appeared no more, it signifies that one of them shall die upon his bed, and yet with pain.
27. For the two that remain, shall be slain with the sword.
28. For the sword of the one shall devour the other: but at the last shall he fall through the sword himself.
29. And whereas you saw two feathers under the wings passing over the head, that is on the right side:
30. It signifies that these are they whom the Highest has kept to their end: this is the small kingdom and full of trouble, as you saw.
31. And the Lyon whom you saw rising up out of the wood, and roaring, and speaking to the Eagle, and rebuking her for her unrighteousness, with all the words which you have heard,
32. This is the Anointed which the Highest has kept for them, and for their wickedness to the end: he shall reprove them, and shall upbraid them with their cruelty.
33. For he shall set them before him alive in judgment, and shall rebuke them and correct them.
34. For the rest of my people shall he deliver with mercy, those that have bin preserved upon my borders, and he shall make them joyful untill the coming of the day of judgment, whereof I have spoken to you from the beginning.
35. This is the dream that you saw, and these are the interpretations.
36. You only have been meet to know this secret of the Highest.
37. Therefore write all these things that you have seen, in a book, and hide them.
38. And teach them to the wise of the people, whose hearts you know may comprehend, & keep these seerets.
39. But wait you here yourself yet seven days moe, that it may be showed you whatsoever it pleases the Highest to declare to you: And with that he went his way.
40. And it came to passe when all the people saw that the seven days were past, and I not come again into the city, they gathered them all together, from the least to the greatest, and came to me, and said,
41. What have we offended you? and what evil have we done against you, that you forsak us, and sit here in this place?
42. For of all the prophets you only are left us, as a cluster of the vintage, and as a candle in a dark place, and as a hauen or ship preserved from the temp:
43. Are not the evils which are come to us, sufficient?
44. If you shall forsake us, how much better had it been for us, if we also had been burnt in the midst of Sion.
45. For we are not better then they that died there. And they wept with a loud voice: then answered I them, and said,
46. Be of good comfort, O Israel, and be not heavy you house of Jacob.
47. For the Highest has you in remembrance, and the mighty has not forgotten you in temptation.
48. As for me, I have not forsaken you, neither am I departed from you: but am come into this place, to pray for the desolation of Sion, and that I might seek mercy for the low estate of your Sanctuary.
49. And now go your way home every man, and after these days will I come to you.
50. So the people went their way into the city, like as I commanded them:
51. But I remained still in the field seven days, as the Angel commanded me, and did eat only in those days, of the flowers of the field, and had my meat of the herbs.2 Esdras|131. And it came to passe after seven days, I dreamed a dream by night.
2. And lo, there arose a wind from the sea that it moved all the waves of it.
3. And I beheld, and lo, that man waxed strong with the thousands of heaven: and when he turned his countenance to look, all the things trembled that were seen under him.
4. And whensoever the voice went out of his mouth, all they burnt, that heard his voice, like as the earth fails when it feels the fire.
5. And after this I beheld, and lo, there was gathered together a multitude of men out of number, from the four winds of the heaven, to subdue the man that came out of the sea.
6. But I beheld, and lo, he had graved himself a great mountain, and flew up upon it.
7. But I would have seen the region, or place, whereout the hill was graven, and I could not.
8. And after this I beheld, and lo, all they which were gathered together to subdue him, were sore afraid, and yet durst fight.
9. And lo, as he saw the violence of the multitude that came, he neither lift up his hand, nor held sword, nor any instrument of war.
10. But only I saw that he sent out of his mouth, as it had been a blast of fire, and out of his lips a flaming breath, and out of his tongue he cast out sparks and tempests,
11. And they were all mixt together; the blast of fire, the flaming breath, and the great temp, and fel with violence upon the multitude, which was prepared to fight, and burnt them up every one, so that upon a sudden, of an innumerable multitude, nothing was to be perceived, but only dust and smell of smoke: wh&#275; I saw this, I was afraid.
12. Afterward saw I the same man come down from the mountain, and call to him an other peaceable multitude.
13. And there came much people to him, whereof some were glad, some were sory, some of them were bound, and other some brought of them that were offered: then was I sick through great fear, and I awaked and said,
14. You have showed your servant wonders from the beginning, and have counted me worthy that you should receive my prayer:
15. Show me now yet the interpretation of this dream.
16. For as I conceive in mine understanding, woe to them that shall be left in those days; and much more woe to them that are not left behind.
17. For they that were not left, were in heaviness.
18. Now understand I the things that are laid up in the latter days, which shall happen to them, and to those that are left behind.
19. Therefore are they come into great perils, and many necessities, like as these dreams declare.
20. Yet is it easier for him that is in danger, to come into these things, then to passe away as a cloud out of the world, and not to see the things that happen in the last days. And he answered to me, and said,
21. The interpretation of the vision shall I show you, and I will open to you, the thing that you have required.
22. Whereas you have spoken of them that are left behind, this is the interpretation.
23. He that shall endure the peril in that time, has kept himself: they that be fallen into danger, are such as have works, and faith towards the Almighty.
24. Know this therefore, that they which be left behind, are more blessed then they that be dead.
25. This is the meaning of the vision: Whereas you saw a man coming up from the midst of the Sea:
26. The same is he whom God the highest has kept a great season, which by his own self shall deliver his creature: and he shall order them that are left behind.
27. And whereas you saw, that out of his mouth there came as a blast of wind, and fire, and storm:
28. And that he held neither sword, nor any instrument of war, but that the rushing in of him destroyed the whole multitude that came to subdue him, this is the interpretation.
29. Behold, the days come, when the most high will begin to deliver them that are upon the earth.
30. And he shall come to the astonishment of them that dwell on the earth.
31. And one shall undertake to fight against another, one city against another, one place against another, one people against another, and one realm against another.
32. And the time shall be, when these things shall come to passe, and the signs shall happen which I showed you before, and then shall my son be declared, whom you saw as a man ascending.
33. And when all the people hear his voice, every man shall in their own land, leave the battle they have one against another.
34. And an innumerable multitude shall be gathered together, as you saw them willing to come, and to overcome him by fighting.
35. But he shall stand upon the top of the mount Sion.
36. And Sion shall come and shall be showed to all men, being prepared and builded, like as you saw the hill graven without hands.
37. And this my son shall rebuke the wicked inventions of those nations, which for their wicked life are fallen into the temp,
38. And shall lay before them their evil thoughts, and the torments with which they shall begin to be tormented, which are like to a flame: and he shall destroy them without labour, by the law which is like to fire.
39. And whereas you saw that he gathered another peaceable multitude to him;
40. Those are the ten tribes, which were caried away prisoners out of their own land, in the time of Osea the king, whom Salmanasar the king of Assyria led away captive, and he caried them over the waters, and so came they into another land.
41. But they took this counsel amongst themselves, that they would leave the multitude of the heathen, and go forth into a further country, where never mankind dwelt,
42. That they might there keep their statutes, which they never kept in their own land.
43. And they entered into Euphrates by the narrow passages of the river.
44. For the most high then showed signs for them, and held still the flood, till they were passed over.
45. For through that country there was a great way to go; namely, of a year and a half: and the same region is called ArsarEs.
46. Then dwelt they there untill the latter time; and now when they shall begin to come,
47. The highest shall stay the springs of the stream again, that they may go through: therefore saw you the multitude with peace.
48. But those that be left behind of your people, are they that are found within my borders.
49. Now when he destroys the multitude of the nations that are gathered together, he shall defend his people that remain.
50. And then shall he show them great wonders.
51. Then said I, O Lord, that bear rule, show me this: Therefore have I seen the man coming up from the midst of the Sea?
52. And he said to me, Like as you can neither seek out, nor know the things that are in the deep of the sea: even so can no man upon earth see my son, or those that be with him, but in the day time.
53. This is the interpretation of the dream which you saw, and by which you only are here lightened.
54. For you have forsaken your own way, and applied your diligence to my law, and sought it.
55. Your life have you ordered in wisdom, and have called understanding your mother.
56. And therefore have I showed you the treasures of the Highest: After other three days, I will speak other things to you, and declare to you mighty and wonderous things.
57. Then went I forth into the field giving praise and thanks greatly to the most High, because of his wonders which he did in time,
58. And because he governs the same, and such things as fall in their seasons, and there I sate three days.2 Esdras|141. And it came to passe, upon the third day I sate under an oke, and behold, there came a voice out of a bush over against me, and said, Esdras, Esdras.
2. And I said, Here am I Lord, and I stood up upon my feet.
3. Then said he to me, In the bush I did manifestly reveal myself to Moses, and talked with him, when my people served in Egypt.
4. And I sent him, and led my people out of Egypt, and brought him up to the mount of Sinai, where I held him by me, a long season,
5. And told him many wonderous things, and showed him the secrets of the times, and the end, and commanded him, saying,
6. These words shall you declare, and these shall you hide.
7. And now I say to you,
8. That you lay up in your heart the signs that I have showed, and the dreams that you have seen, and the interpretations which you have heard:
9. For you shall be taken away from all, and from henceforth you shall remain with my son, and with such as be like you, untill the times be ended.
10. For the world has lost his youth, and the times begin to wax old.
11. For the world is divided into twelve parts, and the ten parts of it are gone already, and half of a tenth part.
12. And there remains that which is after the half of the tenth part.
13. Now therefore set your house in order, and reprove your people, comfort such of them as be in trouble, and now renounce corruption.
14. Let go fro you mortal thoughts, cast away the burdens of man, put off now the weak nature,
15. And set aside the thoughts that are most heavy to you, and haste you to fly from these times.
16. For yet greater evils then those which you have seen happen, shall be done hereafter.
17. For look how much the world shall be weaker through age: so much the more shall evils increase upon them that dwell in it.
18. For the truth is fled far away, and leasing is hard at hand: For now hastes the vision to come, which you have seen.
19. Then answered I before you, and said,
20. Behold, Lord, I will go as you have commanded me, and reprove the people which are present, but they that shall be borne afterward, who shall admonish them? thus the world is set in darkness, and they that dwell in it, are without light.
21. For your law is burnt, therefore no man knows the things that are done of you, or the works that shall begin.
22. But if I have found grace before you, send the holy Ghost into me, and I shall write all that has been done in the world, since the beginning, which were written in your law, that men may find your path, and that they which will live in the latter days, may live.
23. And he answered me, saying, Go your way, gather the people together, and say to them, that they seek you not for forty days.
24. But look you prepare you many box trees, and take with you Sarea, Dabria, Selemia, Eranus and Asiel, these five which are ready to write swiftly.
25. And come here, and I shall light a candle of understanding in your heart, which shall not be put out, till the things be performed which you shall begin to write.
26. And when you have done, some things shall you publish, and some things shall you show secretly to the wise: to morrow this hour shall you begin to write.
27. Then went I forth as he commanded, and gathered all the people together, and said,
28. hear these words, O Israel.
29. Our fathers at the beginning were strangers in Egypt, from from where they were delivered:
30. And received the law of life which they kept not, which you also have transgressed after them.
31. Then was the land, even the land of Sion, parted among you by lot, but your fathers, and you yourselves have done unrighteousness, and have not kept the ways which the Highest commanded you.
32. And for as much as he is a righteous judge, he took from you in time, the thing that he had given you.
33. And now are you here, and your brethren amongst you.
34. Therefore if so be that you will subdue your own understanding, and reform your hearts, you shall be kept alive, and after death you shall obtain mercy.
35. For after death, shall the judgment come, when we shall live again: and then shall the names of the righteous be manifest, and the works of the ungodly shall be declared.
36. Let no man therefore come to me now, nor seek after me these forty days.
37. So I took the five men as he commanded me, and we went into the field, and remained there.
38. And the next day behold a voice called me saying, Esdras, open your mouth and drink that I give you to drink.
39. Then opened I my mouth, and behold, he reached me a full cup, which was full as it were with water, but the color of it was like fire.
40. And I took it, and drank: and when I had drunk of it, my heart uttered understanding: and wisdom grew in my breast, for my spirit strengthened my memory.
41. And my mouth was opened and shut no more.
42. The highest gave understanding to the five men, and they wrote the wonderful visions of the night, that were told, which they knew not: And they sate forty days, and they wrote in the day, and at night they ate bread.
43. As for me I spoke in the day, and held not my tongue by night:
44. In forty days they wrote two hundred and four books.
45. And it came to passe when the forty days were fulfilled, that the Highest spoke, saying, The first that you have written, publish openly, that the worthy and unworthy may read it.
46. But keep the seventy last, that you may deliver them only to such as be wise, among the people.
47. For in them is the spring of understanding, the fountains of wisdom, and the stream of knowledge.
48. And I did so.2 Esdras|151. Behold, speak you in the ears of my people the words of prophecy, which I will put in your mouth, says the Lord.
2. And cause them to be written in paper: for they are faithful and true.
3. fear not the imaginations against you, let not the incredulity of them trouble you, that speak against you.
4. For all the unfaithful shall die in their unfaithfulness.
5. Behold, says the Lord, I will bring plagues upon the world; the sword, famine, death, and destruction.
6. For wickedness has exceedingly polluted the whole earth, and their hurtful works are fulfilled.
7. Therefore says the Lord,
8. I will hold my tongue no more as touching their wickedness, which they profanely commit, neither will I suffer them in those things, in which they wickedly exercise themselves: behold, the innocent & righteous blood cryes to me, and the souls of the just complain continually.
9. And therefore says the Lord, I will surely avenge them, and receive to me, all the innocent blood from among them.
10. Behold, my people is led as a flock to the slaughter: I will not suffer them now to dwell in the land of Egypt.
11. But I will bring them with a mighty hand, and a stretched out arm, and smite Egypt with plagues as before, and will destroy al the land of it.
12. Egypt shall mourn, and the foundation of it shall be smitten with the plague and punishment, that God shall bring upon it.
13. They that till the ground shall mourn: for their seedes shall fail, through the blasting, and hail, and with a fearful constellation.
14. woe to the world, and them that dwell in it.
15. For the sword and their destruction drawes nigh, and one people shall stand up to fight against another, and swords in their hands.
16. For there shall be sedition among men, and invading one another, they shall not regard their kings, nor princes, and the course of their actions shall stand in their power.
17. A man shall desire to go into a city, and shall not be able.
18. For because of their pride, the cities shall be troubled, the houses shall be destroyed, and men shall be afraid.
19. A man shall have no pity upon his neighbour, but shall destroy their houses with the sword, and spoil their goods, because of the lack of bread, and for great tribulation.
20. Behold, says God, I will call together all the Kings of the earth to reverence me, which are from the rising of the Sun, from the South, from the East, and Libanus: to turn themselves one against another, and repay the things that they have done to them.
21. Like as they do yet this day to my chosen, so will I do also and recompense in their bosom, Thus says the Lord God;
22. My right hand shall not spare the sinners, and my sword shall not cease over them, that shed innocent blood upon earth.
23. The fire is gone forth from his wrath, and has consumed the foundations of the earth, and the sinners like the straw that is kindled.
24. Wo to them that sin and keep not my commandments, says the Lord.
25. I will not spare them: go your way you children from the power, defile not my Sanctuary:
26. For the Lord knows all them that sin against him, and therefore delivers he them to death and destruction.
27. For now are the plagues come upon the whole earth, and you shall remain in them, for God shall not deliver you, because you have sinned against him.
28. Behold an horrible vision, and the appearance of it from the East.
29. Where the nations of the dragons of Arabia shall come out with many charets, and the multitude of them shall be caried as the wind upon earth, that all they which hear them, may fear and tremble.
30. Also the Carmanians raging in wrath, shall go forth as the wild bores of the wood, and with great power shall they come, and join battle with them, and shall waste a portion of the land of the Assyrians.
31. And then shall the dragons have the upper hand, remembering their nature, and if they shall turn themselves, conspiring together in great power to persecute them,
32. Then these shall be troubled, and keep silence through their power, and shall flee.
33. And from the land of the Assyrians, shall the enemy besiege them, and consume some of them, and in their host shall be fear, and dread and strife among their kings.
34. Behold clouds from the East, and from the North, to the South, and they are very horrible to look upon; full of wrath and storm.
35. They shall smite one upon another, & they shall smite down a great multitude of stars upon the earth, even their own star; and blood shall be from the sword to the belly.
36. And dung of men to the camels hough.
37. And there shall be great fearfulness and trembling upon earth: and they that see the wrath, shall be afraid, and trembling shall come upon them.
38. And then shall there come great storms, from the South, and from the North, & another part from the West.
39. And strong winds shall arise from the East, and shall open it, and the cloud which he raised up in wrath, and the star stirred to cause fear toward the East and West wind, shall be destroyed.
40. The great and mighty clouds shall be lifted up full of wrath, and the star, that they may make all the earth afraid, and them that dwell in it, and they shall pour out over every high and eminent place, an horrible star.
41. Fire and hail, and fleeing swords, and many waters, that all fields may be full, and all rivers with the abundance of great waters.
42. And they shall break down the cities, and walls, mountains and hills, trees of the wood, and grass of the meadows, and their corn.
43. And they shall go steadfastly to Babylon, and make her afraid.
44. They shall come to her, and besiege her, the star and all wrath shall they pour out upon her, then shall the dust and smoke go up to the heaven: and all they that be about her, shall bewail her.
45. And they that remain under her, shall do service to them that have put her in fear.
46. And you Asia that are partaker of the hope of Babylon, and are the glory of her person:
47. woe be to you you wretch, because you have made yourself like to her, and have decked your daughters in whoredom, that they might please and glory in your lovers, which have alway desired to commit whoredom with you.
48. You have followed her, that is hated in all her works and inventions: therefore says God,
49. I will send plagues upon you: widowhood, poverty, famine, sword, and pestilence, to waste your houses with destruction and death.
50. And the glory of the power shall be dried up as flour, when the heat shall arise that is sent over you.
51. You shall be weakened as a poor woman with stripes, and as one chastised with woundes, so that the mighty and lovers shall not be able to receive you.
52. Would I with jealousy have so proceeded against you, says the Lord,
53. If you hadd not alway slain my chosen, exalting the stroke of your hands, & saying over their dead, when you were drunken,
54. Set forth the beauty of your countenance.
55. The reward of your whoredom shall be in your bosom, therefore shall you receive recompense.
56. Like as you have done to my chosen, says the Lord; even so shall God do to you, and shall deliver you into mischief.
57. Your children shall die of hunger, and you shall fall through the sword: your cities shall be broken down, and all your shall perish with the sword in the field.
58. They that be in the mountains shall die of hunger, and eat their own flesh, and drink their own blood, for very hunger of bread, & thirst of water.
59. You, as unhappy, shall come through the Sea, and receive plagues again.
60. And in the passage, they shall rush on the idle city, and shall destroy some portion of your land, and consume part of your glory, and shall return to Babylon that was destroyed.
61. And you shall be cast down by them, as stubble, and they shall be to you as fire,
62. And shall consume you and your cities, your land and your mountains, all your woods and your fruitful trees shall they burn up with fire.
63. Your children shall they cary away captive, and look what you have, they shall spoil it, and mar the beauty of your face.2 Esdras|161. woe be to you, Babylon and Asia, woe be to you Egypt and Syria.
2. Gird up yourselves with clothes of sack and haire, bewail your children, and be sory, for your destruction is at hand.
3. A sword is sent upon you, and who may turn it back?
4. A fire is sent among you, and who may quench it?
5. Plagues are sent to you, and what is he that may drive them away?
6. May any man drive away a hungry Lion in the wood? or may any one quench the fire in stubble, when it has begun to burn?
7. May one turn again the arrow that is shot of a strong archer?
8. The mighty Lord sends the plagues, and who is he that can drive them away?
9. A fire shall go forth from his wrath: & who is he that may quench it?
10. He shall cast lightnings, and who shall not fear? he shall thunder, and who shall not be afraid?
11. The Lord shall threaten, and who shall not be utterly beaten to powder at his presence?
12. The earth quakes and the foundations of it, the sea arises up with waves from the deep, and the waves of it are troubled, and the fishes of it also before the Lord, and before the glory of his power.
13. For strong is his right hand that bends the bow, his arrowes that he shootes are sharp, and shall not miss when they begin to be shot into the ends of the world.
14. Behold, the plagues are sent, and shall not return again, untill they come upon the earth.
15. The fire is kindled, and shall not be put out, till it consume the foundation of the earth.
16. Like as an arrow which is shot of a mighty archer returns not backward: even so the plagues that shall be sent upon earth, shall not return again.
17. woe is me, woe is me, who will deliver me in those days?
18. The beginning of sorrows, and great mournings, the beginning of famine, and great death: the beginning of wars, and the powers shall stand in fear, the beginning of evils, what shall I do when these evils shall come?
19. Behold, famine, and plague, tribulation and anguish, are sent as scourges for amendment.
20. But for all these things they shall not turn from their wickedness, nor be alway mindful of the scourges.
21. Behold, victuals shall be so good cheap upon earth, that they shall think themselves to be in good case, and even then shall evils grow upon earth, sword, famine, and great confusion.
22. For many of them that dwell upon earth, shall perish of famine, and the other that escape the hunger, shall the sword destroy.
23. And the dead shall be cast out as dung, and there shall be no man to comfort them, for the earth shall be wasted, and the cities shall be cast down.
24. There shall be no man left to till the earth, and to sow it.
25. The trees shall give fruit, and who shall gather them?
26. The grapes shall ripe, and who shall tread them? for all places shall be desolate of men.
27. So that one man shall desire to see another, and to hear his voice.
28. For of a city there shall be ten left, and two of the field which shall hide themselves in the thick groves, and in the clefts of rocks.
29. As in an orchard of olives, upon every tree there are left three or four olives:
30. Or, when as a vineyard is gathered, there are left some clusters of them that diligently seek through the vineyard:
31. Even so in those days there shall be three or four left by them that search their houses with the sword.
32. And the earth shall be laid waste, and the fields of it shall wax old, and her ways and all her paths shall grow full of thorns, because no man shall labor therethrough.
33. The virgins shall mourn having no bridegrooms, the women shall mourn having no husbands, their daughters shall mourn having no helpers.
34. In the wars shall their bridegrooms be destroyed, and their husbands shall perish of famine.
35. hear now these things, and understand them, you servants of the Lord.
36. Behold the word of the Lord, receive it, believe not the gods of whom the Lord spoke.
37. Behold, the plagues draw nigh, and are not slack.
38. As when a woman with child in the ninth month brings forth her son, within two or three hours of her birth great pains compass her womb, which pains, when the child comes forth, they slack not a moment,
39. Even so shall not the plagues be slack to come upon the earth, and the world shall mourn, and sorrows shall come upon it on every side.
40. O my people, hear my word: make you ready to the battle, and in those evils, be even as pilgrimes upon the earth.
41. He that sells let him be as he that flees away: and he that buyes, as one that will loose.
42. He that occupies merchandise, as he that had no profit by it: and he that builds, as he that shall not dwell in it.
43. He that sows, as if he should not reap: so also he that plants the vineyard, as he that shall not gather the grapes.
44. They that marry, as they that shall get no children: and they that marry not, as the widowers.
45. And therefore they that labour, labour in vain.
46. For strangers shall reap their fruits, and spoil their goods, overthrow their houses; and take their children captives, for in captivity and famine shall they get children.
47. And they that occupy their merchandise with robbery, the more they decke their cities, their houses, their possessions and their own persons:
48. The more will I be angry with them for their sin, says the Lord.
49. Like as an whore envies a right honest and virtuous woman:
50. So shall righteousness have iniquity, when she deckes herself, and shall accuse her, to her face, when he comes that shall defend him that diligently searches out every sin upon earth.
51. And therefore be you not like thereunto, nor to the works of it.
52. For yet a little iniquity shall be taken away out of the earth, and righteousness shall reign among you.
53. Let not the sinner say that he has not sinned: for God shall burn coals of fire upon his head, which says before the Lord God and his glory, I have not sinned.
54. Behold, the Lord knows all the works of men, their imaginations, their thoughts, and their hearts:
55. Which spoke but the word, let the earth be made, and it was made: let the heaven be made, and it was created.
56. In his word were the stars made, and he knows the number of them.
57. He searches the deep, and the treasures of it, he has measured the Sea, and what it containes.
58. He has shut the Sea in the midst of the waters, and with his word has he hanged the earth upon the waters.
59. He spreads out the heavens like a vault, upon the waters has he founded it.
60. In the desert has he made springs of water, and pooles upon the tops of the mountains, that the floods might pour down from the high rocks to water the earth.
61. He made man, and put his heart in the midst of the body, and gave him breath, life, and understanding.
62. Yea and the spirit of Almighty God, which made all things, and searches out all hidden things in the secrets of the earth.
63. Surely he knows your inventions, and what you think in your hearts, even them that sin, and would hide their sin.
64. Therefore has the Lord exactly searched out all your works, and he will put you all to shame.
65. And when your sins are brought forth you shall be ashamed before men, and your own sins shall be your accusers in that day.
66. What will you do? or how will you hide your sins before God and his Angels?
67. Behold, God himself is the judge, fear him: leave off from your sins, and forget your iniquities to meddle no more with them for ever, so shall God lead you forth, and deliver you from all trouble.
68. For behold, the burning wrath of a great multitude is kindled over you, and they shall take away certain of you, and feed you being idle with things offered to idols.
69. And they that consent to them shall be had in derision, and in reproach, and troden under foot.
70. For there shall be in every place, and in the next cities a great insurrection upon those that fear the Lord.
71. They shall be like mad men, sparing none, but still spoiling and destroying those that fear the Lord.
72. For they shall waste and take away their goods, and cast them out of their houses.
73. Then shall they be known who are my chosen, and they shall be tried, as the gold in the fire:
74. hear, O you my beloved, says the Lord: behold, the days of trouble are at hand, but I will deliver you from the same.
75. Be you not afraid, neither doubt, for God is your guide,
76. And the guide of them who keep my commandments, and precepts, says the Lord God; Let not your sins weigh you down, and let not your iniquities lift up themselves.
77. woe be to them that are bound with their sins, and covered with their iniquities: like as a field is covered over with bushes, and the path of it covered with thorns, that no man may travel through.
78. It is left undressed, and is cast into the fire, to be consumed therewith.