Bel and the Dragon|11. And King Astyages was gathered to his fathers, and Cyrus of Persia received his kingdom.
2. And Daniel conversed with the king, and was honored above all his friends.
3. Now the Babylonians had an Idol called Bel, and there were spent upon him every day twelve great measures of fine flower, and forty sheep, and six vessels of wine.
4. And the king worshiped it, and went daily to adore it: but Daniel worshiped his own God. And the king said to him, Why do not you worship Bel?
5. Who answered and said, Because I may not worship idols made with hands, but the living God, who has created the heaven, and the earth, and has sovereignty over all flesh.
6. Then said the King to him, Think you not that Bel is a living god? see you not how much he eats and drinks every day?
7. Then Daniel smiled, and said, O king, be not deceived: for this is but clay within, and brasse without, and did never eat or drink any thing.
8. So the king was wroth, and called for his Priests, and said to them, If you tell me not who this is that devours these expenses, you shall die.
9. But if you can certify me that Bel devours them, then Daniel shall die: for he has spoken blasphemy against Bel. And Daniel said to the king, Let it be according to your word.
10. (Now the Priests of Bel were threescore and ten, beside their wives and children) and the king went with Daniel into the temple of Bel.
11. So Bels Priests said, Lo, we go out: but you, O king, set on the meat, and make ready the wine, and shut the door fast, and seal it with your own signet:
12. And to morrow, when you come in, if you find not that Bel has eaten up all, we will suffer death; or else Daniel, that speaks falsely against us.
13. And they little regarded it: for under the table they had made a privy entrance, by which they entered in continually, and consumed those things.
14. So when they were gone forth, the king set meats before Bel. Now Daniel had commanded his servants to bring ashes, and those they strewed throughout all the temple, in the presence of the king alone: then went they out and shut the door, & sealed it with the kings signet, and so departed.
15. Now in the night came the Priests with their wives and children (as they were woont to do) and did eat and drink up all.
16. In the morning betime the king arose, and Daniel with him.
17. And the king said, Daniel, are the seals whole? And he said, Yea, O king, they be whole.
18. And as soon as he had opened the door, the king looked upon the table, and cried with a loud voice, Great are you, O Bel, and with you is no deceit at all.
19. Then laughed Daniel, and held the king that he should not go in, and said, Behold now the pavement, and mark well whose footsteps are these.
20. And the king said, I see the footsteps of men, women and children: and then the king was angry,
21. And took the Priests, with their wives and children, who showed him the privy doors, where they came in, and consumed such things as were upon the table.
22. Therefore the king slew them, and delivered Bel into Daniels power, who destroyed him and his temple.
23. And in that same place there was a great Dragon, which they of Babylon worshiped.
24. And the king said to Daniel, Will you also say that this is of brasse? lo, he lives, he eats and drinks, you can not say, that he is no living God: therefore worship him.
25. Then said Daniel to the king, I will worship the Lord my God: for he is the living God.
26. But give me leave, O king, and I shall slay this dragon without sword or staff. The king said, I give you leave.
27. Then Daniel took pitch, fat, and haire, and did seethe them together, and made lumpes of it: this he put in the Dragons mouth, and so the Dragon burst in sunder: and Daniel said, Lo, these are the gods you worship.
28. When they of Babylon heard that, they took great indignation, and conspired against the king, saying, The king is become a Jew, and he has destroyed Bel, he has slain the Dragon, and put the Priests to death.
29. So they came to the king, and said, deliver us Daniel, or else we will destroy you and your house.
30. Now when the king saw that they pressed him sore, being constrained, he delivered Daniel to them:
31. Who cast him into the lions den, where he was six days.
32. And in the den there were seven lyons, and they had given them every day two carkeises, and two sheep: which then were not given to them, to the intent they might devour Daniel.
33. Now there was in Iury a Prophet called Habacuc, who had made pottage, & had broken bread in a boule, and was going into the field, for to bring it to the reapers.
34. But the Angel of the Lord said to Habacuc, Go carry the dinner that you have into Babylon to Daniel, who is in the lions den.
35. And Habacuc said, Lord, I never saw Babylon: neither do I know where the den is.
36. Then the Angel of the Lord took him by the crown, and bare him by the haire of his head, and through the vehemency of his spirit, set him in Babylon over the den.
37. And Habacuc cryed, saying, O Daniel, Daniel, take the dinner which God has sent you.
38. And Daniel said, You have remembered me, O God: neither have you forsaken them that seek you, and love you.
39. So Daniel arose and did eat: and the Angel of the Lord set Habacuc in his own place again immediately.
40. Upon the seventh day the king went to bewail Daniel: and when he came to the den, he looked in, and behold, Daniel was sitting.
41. Then cried the king with a loud voice, saying, Great are you, O Lord God of Daniel, and there is none other besides you.
42. And he drew him out: and cast those that were the cause of his destruction into the den: and they were devoured in a moment before his face.