Judith|11. In the twelfth year of the reign of Nabuchodonosor, who reigned in Nineue the great city, (in the days of Arphaxad, which reigned over the Medes in Ecbatane,
2. And built in Ecbatane walls round about of stones hewn, three cubits broad, and six cubits long, and made the height of the wall seventy cubits, and the breadth of it fifty cubits:
3. And set the towers of it upon the gates of it, an hundred cubits high, and the breadth of it in the foundation threescore cubits.
4. And he made the gates of it, even gates that were raised to the height of seventy cubits, & the breadth of them was forty cubits, for the going forth of his mighty armies, and for the setting in array of his footmen.)
5. Even in those days, king Nabuchodonosor made war with king Arphaxad in the great plain, which is the plain in the borders of Ragau.
6. And there came to him, all they that dwelt in the hill country, and all that dwelt by Euphrates, and Tigris, and Hydaspes, and the plain of Arioch the king of the Elimeans, and very many nations of the sons of Chelod, assembled themselves to the battle.
7. Then Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians, sent to all that dwelt in Persia, and to all that dwelt Westward, and to those that dwelt in Cilicia, and Damascus and Libanus, and Antilibanus, and to all that dwelt upon the Sea coast,
8. And to those amongst the nations that were of Carmel, and Galaad, and the higher Galile, and the great plain of Esdrelon,
9. And to all that were in Samaria, and the cities of it: and beyond Iordan to Jerusalem, and Betane, and Chellus, and Kades, and the river of Egypt, and Taphnes, and Ramesse, and all the land of Gesem,
10. Untill you come beyond Tanis, and Memphis, and to all the inhabitants of Egypt, untill you come to the borders of Ethiopia.
11. But all the inhabitants of the land made light of the commandment of Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians, neither went they with him to the battle: for they were not afraid of him: yea he was before them as one man, and they sent away his Ambassadors from them without effect, and with disgrace.
12. Therefore Nabuchodonosor was very angry with all this country, and sware by his throne and kingdom, that he would surely be avenged upon all those coasts of Cilicia, and Damascus, and Syria, and that he would slay with the sword all the inhabitants of the land of Moab, and the children of Ammon, and all Judea, and all that were in Egypt, till you come to the borders of the two Seas.
13. Then he marched in battle array with his power against king Arphaxad in the seventeenth year, and he prevailed in his battle: for he overthrew all the power of Arphaxad, and all his horsemen and all his chariots,
14. And became Lord of his cities, and came to Ecbatane, and took the towers, and spoiled the streets of it, and turned the beauty of it into shame.
15. He took also Arphaxad in the mountains of Ragau, and smote him through with his dartes, and destroyed him utterly that day.
16. So he returned afterward to Nineue, both he and all his company of sundry nations: being a very great multitude of men of war, and there he took his ease and banketted, both he and his army an hundred and twenty days.Judith|21. And in the eighteenth year, the two and twentieth day of the first month, there was talk in the house of Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians, that he should as he said avenge himself on all the earth.
2. So he called to him all his officers, and all his nobles, and communicated with them his secret counsel, and concluded the afflicting of the whole earth out of his own mouth.
3. Then they decreed to destroy all flesh that did not obey the commandment of his mouth.
4. And when he had ended his counsel, Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians called Olofernes the chief captain of his army, which was next to him, and said to him,
5. Thus says the great king, the Lord of the whole earth: behold, you shall go forth from my presence, and take with you men that trust in their own strength, of footmen an hundred and twenty thousand, and the number of horses with their riders twelve thousand.
6. And you shall go against all the West country, because they disobeyed my commandment.
7. And you shall declare to them that they prepare for me earth and water: for I will go forth in my wrath against them, and will cover the whole face of the earth with the feet of mine army, and I will give them for a spoil to them.
8. So that their slain shall fill their valleys, and brookes, and the river shall be filled with their dead, till it overflow.
9. And I will lead them captives to the utmost parts of all the earth.
10. You therefore shall go forth, and take before hand for me all their coasts, and if they will yield themselves to you, you shall reserve them for me till the day of their punishment.
11. But concerning them that rebel, let not your eye spare them: but put them to the slaughter, and spoil them wheresoever you go.
12. For as I live, and by the power of my kingdom, whatsoever I have spoken, that will I do by mine hand.
13. And take you heed that you transgress none of the commandments of your Lord, but accomplish them fully, as I have commanded you, and defer not to do them.
14. Then Olofernes went forth from the presence of his Lord, and called all the governors and captains, and the officers of the army of Assur.
15. And he mustered the chosen men for the battle, as his Lord had commanded him, to an hundred and twenty thousand, & twelve thousand archers on Horseback.
16. And he ranged them as a great army is ordered for the war.
17. And he took Camels, and Asses for their carriages a very great number, and sheep, and Oxen, & Goates without number, for their provision,
18. And plenty of victual for every man of the army, and very much gold, and silver, out of the Kings house.
19. Then he went forth and all his power to go before King Nabuchodonosor in the voyage, and to cover al the face of the earth Westward with their charets, and horsemen, and their chosen footmen.
20. A great multitude also of sundry countries came with them, like locusts, and like the sand of the earth: for the multitude was without number.
21. And they went forth of Nineue, three days journey toward the plain of BectilEs, and pitched from BectilEs near the mountain, which is at the left hand of the upper Cilicia.
22. Then he took all his army, his footmen, and horsemen and chariots, and went from thence into the hill country,
23. And destroyed Phud, and Lud: and spoiled all the children of Rasses, and the children of Ismael, which were toward the wilderness at the South of the land of the Chellians.
24. Then he went over Euphrates, and went through Mesopotamia, and destroyed all the high cities that were upon the river Arbonai, till you come to the sea.
25. And he took the borders of Cilicia, and killed all that resisted him, and came to the borders of IaphEs, which were toward the South, over against Arabia.
26. He compassed also all the children of Madian, and burnt up their tabernacles, and spoiled their sheepcoats.
27. Then he went down into the plain of Damascus in the time of wheat harvest, and burnt up all their fields, and destroyed their flocks, and herds, also he spoiled their cities, and utterly wasted their countries, and smote all their young men with the edge of the sword.
28. Therefore the fear and dread of him, fell upon all the inhabitants of the sea coastes, which were in Sidon and Tyrus, and them that dwelt in Sur, and Ocina, and all that dwelt in Ienmaan, and they that dwelt in Azotus, and Aschalon feared him greatly.Judith|31. So they sent Ambassadors to him, to treat of peace, saying,
2. Behold, we the servants of Nabuchodonosor the great king lie before you; use us as shall be good in your sight.
3. Behold, our houses, and all our places, and all our fields of wheat, and flocks, and herds, and all the lodges of our tents, lie before your face: use them as it pleases you.
4. Behold, even our cities and the inhabitants of it are your servants, come and deal with them, as seems good to you.
5. So the men came to Holofernes, & declared to him after this manner.
6. Then came he down toward the Sea coast, both he and his army, and set garrisons in the high cities, and took out of them chosen men for aide.
7. So they and all the country round about, received them with garlands, with dances, and with timbrels.
8. Yet he did cast down their frontiers, and cut down their groves: for he had decreed to destroy all the gods of the land, that all nations should worship Nabuchodonosor only, and that all tongues and tribes should call upon him as God.
9. Also he came over against Esdraelon near to Judea, over against the great strait of Judea.
10. And he pitched between Geba, and Scythopolis, and there he taried a whole month, that he might gather together all the carriages of his army.Judith|41. Now the children of Israel that dwelt in Judea, heard all that Holofernes the chief captain of Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians had done to the nations, and after what manner he had spoiled all their Temples, and brought them to nought.
2. Therefore they were exceedingly afraid of him, and were troubled for Jerusalem, and for the Temple of the Lord their God.
3. For they were newly returned from the captivity, and all the people of Judea were lately gathered together: and the vessels, and the Altar, and the house, were sanctified after the profanation.
4. Therefore they sent into all the coasts of Samaria, and the villages, and to Bethoron, and Belmen, and Jericho, and to Choba, and Esora, and to the valley of Salem,
5. And possessed themselves beforehand of all the tops of the high mountains, and fortified the villages that were in them, and laid up victuals for the provision of war: for their fields were of late reaped.
6. Also Joacim the hie Pri which was in those daies in Jerusalem, wrote to them that dwelt in Bethulia, and Betomestham which is over against Esdraelon toward the open country near to Dothaim,
7. Charging them to keep the passages of the hill country: for by them there was an entrance into Judea, and it was easy to stop them that would come up, because the passage was strait for two men at the most.
8. And the children of Israel did as Joacim the hie Pri had commanded them, with the ancients of all the people of Israel, which dwelt at Jerusal&#275;.
9. Then every man of Israel cryed to God with great fervency, and with great vehemency did they humble their souls:
10. Both they and their wives, and their children, and their cattle, and every stranger and hireling, and their servants bought with money, put sackcloth upon their loins.
11. Thus every man and woman, and the little children, & the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell before the temple, and cast ashes upon their heads, and spread out their sackcloth before the face of the Lord: also they put sackcloth about the Altar,
12. And cryed to the God of Israel all with one consent earnestly, that he would not give their children for a pray, and their wives for a spoil, and the cities of their inheritance to destruction, and the Sanctuary to profanation and reproach, & for the nations to rejoice at.
13. So God heard their prayers, and looked upon their afflictions: for the people fasted many days in all Judea, and Jerusalem, before the Sanctuary of the Lord Almighty.
14. And Joacim the high Pri, and all the priests that stood before the Lord, and they which ministered to the Lord, had their loins girt with sackcloth, and offered the daily burnt offerings, with the vows and free gifts of the people,
15. And had ashes on their miters, and cried to the Lord with all their power, that he would look upon all the house of Israel graciously.Judith|51. Then was it declared to Holofernes the chief captain of the army of Assur that the children of Israel had prepared for war, and had shut up the passages of the hill country, and had fortified all the tops of the high hills, and had laid impediments in the champion countries.
2. Wherewith he was very angry, and called all the princes of Moab, and the captains of Ammon, and all the governors of the Sea coast.
3. And he said to them, Tell me now, you sons of Canaan, who this people is that dwells in the hill country? and what are the cities that they inhabit? and what is the multitude of their army? and in which is their power and strength, and what king is set over them, or captain of their army?
4. And why have they determined not to come and meet me, more then all the inhabitants of the West?
5. Then said Achior, the captain of all the sons of Ammon: Let my lord now hear a word from the mouth of your servant, and I will declare to you the truth, concerning this people which dwells near you, and inhabites the hill countries: and there shall no lie come out of the mouth of your servant.
6. This people are descended of the Chaldeans,
7. And they sojourned heretofore in Mesopotamia, because they would not follow the gods of their fathers, which were in the land of Caldea.
8. For they left the way of their ancestors, and worshiped the God of heaven, the God whom they knew: so they cast them out from the face of their gods, and they fled into Mesopotamia, and sojourned there many days.
9. Then their God commanded them to depart from the place where they sojourned, and to go into the land of Chanaan, where they dwelt, and were increased with gold and silver, and with very much cattle.
10. But when a famine covered all the land of Chanaan, they went down into Egypt, and sojourned there, while they were nourished, and became there a great multitude, so that one could not number their nation.
11. Therefore the king of Egypt rose up against them, and dealt subtly with them, and brought them low, with labouring in brick, & made them slaves.
12. Then they cried to their God, and he smote all the land of Egypt with incurable plagues, so the Egyptians cast them out of their sight.
13. And God dried the red Sea before them:
14. And brought them to mount Sina, and Cades Barne, and cast forth all that dwelt in the wilderness.
15. So they dwelt in the land of the Amorites, and they destroyed by their strength all them of Esebon, and passing over Iordan they possessed all the hill country.
16. And they cast forth before them, the Chanaanite, the Pheresite, the Iebusite, and the Sychemite, and all the Gergesites, and they dwelt in that country many days.
17. And while they sinned not before their God, they prospered, because the God that hates iniquity, was with them.
18. But when they departed from the way which he appointed them, they were destroyed in many battels very sore, and were led captives into a land that was not theirs, and the Temple of their God was cast to the ground, and their cities were taken by the enemies.
19. But now are they returned to their God, and are come up from the places, where they were scattered, and have possessed Jerusalem, where their Sanctuary is, and are seated in the hill country, for it was desolate.
20. Now therefore, my lord and governor, if there be any error in this people, & they sin against their God, let us consider that this shall be their ruin, and let us go up, and we shall overcome them.
21. But if there be no iniquity in their nation, let my lord now passe by, lest their Lord defend them, and their God be for them, and we become a reproach before all the world.
22. And when Achior had finished these sayings, all the people standing round about the tent, murmured, and the chief men of Holofernes, and all that dwelt by the Sea side, and in Moab, spoke that he should kill him.
23. For, say they, we will not be afraid of the face of the children of Israel, for lo, it is a people that have no strength, nor power for a strong battle.
24. Now therefore, Lord Holofernes, we will go up, and they shall be a pray, to be devoured of all your army.Judith|61. And when the tumult of men that were about the council was ceased, Holofernes the chief captain of the army of Assur, said to Achior and all the Moabites, before all the company of other nations,
2. And who are you Achior and the hirelings of Ephraim, that you have prophesied amongst us as to day, and have said, that we should not make war with the people of Israel, because their God will defend them? and who is God but Nabuchodonosor?
3. He will send his power, and will destroy them from the face of the earth, and their God shall not deliver them: but we his servants will destroy them as one man, for they are not able to sustain the power of our horses.
4. For with them we will tread them under foot, and their mountains shall be drunken with their blood, and their fields shall be filled with their dead bodies, and their footesteps shall not be able to stand before us, for they shall utterly perish, says king Nabuchodonosor Lord of all the earth; for he said, none of my words shall be in vain.
5. And you Achior, an hireling of Ammon, which have spoken these words in the day of your iniquity, shall see my face no more, from this day untill I take vengeance of this nation that came out of Egypt.
6. And then shall the sword of mine army, and the multitude of them that serve me, passe through your sides, and you shall fal among their slain, when I return.
7. Now therefore my servants shall bring you back into the hill country, and shall set you in one of the cities of the passages.
8. And you shall not perish till you be destroyed with them.
9. And if you persuade yourself in your mind, that they shall not be taken, let not your countenance fall: I have spoken it, and none of my words shall be in vain.
10. Then Holofernes commanded his servants that waited in his tent, to take Achior and bring him to Bethulia, and deliver him into the hands of the children of Israel.
11. So his servants took him, and brought him out of the campe into the plain, and they went from the midst of the plain into the hill country, and came to the fountains that were under Bethulia.
12. And when the men of the city saw them, they took up their weapons, and went out of the city to the top of the hill, and every man that used a sling from coming up by casting of stones against them.
13. Nevertheless having gotten privily under the hill, they bound Achior and cast him down, and left him at the foot of the hill, and returned to their Lord.
14. But the Israelites descended from their city, and came to him, and loosed him, and brought him into Bethulia, and presented him to the governors of the city,
15. Which were in those days Ozias the son of Micha of the tribe of Simeon, and Chabris the son of Gothoniel, and Charmis the son of Melchiel.
16. And they called together all the ancients of the city, and all their youth ran together, and their women to the assembly, and they set Achior in the midst of all their people. Then Ozias asked him of that which was done.
17. And he answered and declared to them the words of the counsel of Holofernes, and all the words that he had spoken in the midst of the princes of Assur, and whatsoever Holofernes had spoken proudly against the house of Israel.
18. Then the people fell down, and worshiped God, and cryed to God, saying,
19. O Lord God of heaven, behold their pride, and pity the low estate of our nation, and look upon the face of those that are sanctified to you this day.
20. Then they comforted Achior and praised him greatly.
21. And Ozias took him out of the assembly to his house, and made a feast to the Elders, & they called on the God of Israel all that night for help.Judith|71. The next day Holofernes commanded all his army, and all his people which were come to take his part, that they should remove their campe against Bethulia, to take aforehand the ascents of the hill country, and to make war against the children of Israel.
2. Then their strong men removed their campes in that day, and the army of the men of war was, an hundred and seventy thousand footmen, and twelve thousand horsemen, beside the baggage, & other men that were afoot amongst them, a very great multitude.
3. And they camped in the valley near to Bethulia, by the fountain, and they spread themselves in breadth over Dothaim, even to Belmaim, and in length from Bethulia to Cyamon which is over against Esdraelon.
4. Now the children of Israel when they saw the multitude of them, were greatly troubled, and said every one to his neighbour: Now will these men lick up the face of the earth; for neither the high mountains, nor the valleys, nor the hills, are able to bear their weight.
5. Then every man took up his weapons of war, and when they had kindled fires upon their towers, they remained and watched all that night.
6. But in the second day Holofernes brought forth all his horsemen, in the sight of the children of Israel which were in Bethulia,
7. And viewed the passages up to the city, and came to the fountain of their waters, and took them, and set garrisons of men of war over them, and he himself removed towards his people.
8. Then came to him all the chief of the children of Esau, and al the governors of the people of Moab, and the captains of the sea coast, and said,
9. Let our lord now hear a word, that there be not an overthrow in your army.
10. For this people of the children of Israel do not trust in their speares, but in the height of the mountains in which they dwell, because it is not easy to come up to the tops of their mountains.
11. Now therefore my lord, fight not against them in battle array, and there shall not so much as one man of your people perish.
12. Remain in your campe, and keep all the men of your army, and let your servants get into their hands the fountain of water which issues forth of the foot of the mountain.
13. For all the inhabitants of Bethulia have their water thence: so shall thirst kil them, & they shall give up their city, and we and our people shall go up to the tops of the mountains that are near, and will campe upon them, to watch that none go out of the city.
14. So they and their wives, and their children shall be consumed with famine, and before the sword come against them, they shall be overthrown in the streets where they dwell.
15. Thus shall you render them an evil reward: because they rebelled and met not your person peaceably.
16. And these words pleased Holofernes, and al his servants, and he appointed to do as they had spoken.
17. So the campe of the children of Ammon departed, and with them five thousand of the Assyrians, and they pitched in the valley, and took the waters, and the fountains of the waters of the children of Israel.
18. Then the children of Esau went up, with the children of Ammon, and camped in the hil country over against Dotha-em: and they sent some of them toward the South, & toward the East over against Ekrebel, which is near to Chusi, that is upon the brook Mochmur, and the rest of the army of the Assyrians camped in the plain, and covered the face of the whole land, and their tents and carriages were pitched to a very great multitude.
19. Then the children of Israel cried to the Lord their God, because their heart failed, for all their enemies had compassed them round about, & there was no way to escape out from among them.
20. Thus all the company of Assur remained about them, both their footmen, charets and horsemen, four and thirty days, so that all their vessels of water failed all the inhabitants of Bethulia.
21. And the cisternes were emptied, and they had not water to drink their fill, for one day; for they gave them drink by measure.
22. Therefore their young children were out of heart, and their women and young men fainted for thirst, and fell down in the streets of the city, and by the passages of the gates, and there was no longer any strength in them.
23. Then all the people assembled to Ozias, and to the chief of the city, both young men, and women, and children, and cryed with a loud voice, and said before all the Elders;
24. God be Judge between us and you: for you have done us great injury in that you have not required peace of the children of Assur.
25. For now we have no helper: but God has sold us into their hands, that we should be throwen down before them with thirst, and great destruction.
26. Now therefore call them to you, and deliver the whole city for a spoil to the people of Olofernes, and to all his army.
27. For it is better for us to be made a spoil to them, then to die for thirst: for we will be his servants, that our souls may live, and not see the death of our infants before our eyes, nor our wives nor our children to die.
28. We take to witness against you, the heaven and the earth, and our God, and Lord of our fathers, which punishes us according to our sins, and the sins of our fathers, that he do not according as we have said this day.
29. Then there was great weeping with one consent in the midst of the assembly, and they cryed to the Lord God with a loud voice.
30. Then said Ozias to them, Brethren, be of good courage, let us yet endure five days, in the which space the Lord our God may turn his mercy toward us, for he will not forsake us utterly.
31. And if these days passe, and there come no help to us, I will do according to your word.
32. And he dispersed the people every one to their own charge, and they went to the walls and towers of their city, and sent the women and children into their houses, and they were very low brought in the city.Judith|81. Now at that time JudEs heard of it, which was the daughter of Merari the son of Ox, the son of Joseph, the son of Oziel, the son of Elcia, the son of Ananias, the son of Gedeon, the son of Raphaim, the son of Acitho, the son of Eliu, the son of Eliab, the son of Nathanael, the son of Samael, the son of Salasadai, the son of Israel.
2. And Manasses was her husband of her tribe and kindred, who died in the barley harvest.
3. For as he stood overseeing them that bound sheaves in the field, the heat came upon his head, and he fell on his bed, and died in the city of Bethulia, and they buried him with his fathers, in the field between Dothaim and Balamo.
4. So JudEs was a widow in her house three years, and four months.
5. And she made her a tent upon the top of her house, and put on sackcloth on her loins, and ware her widows apparel.
6. And she fasted all the days of her widowhood, save the eues of the Sabbath, and the Sabbaths, and the eues of the new Moones, and the new Moones, and the Feasts, and solemn days of the house of Israel.
7. She was also of a goodly countenance, and very beautiful to behold: and her husband Manasses had left her gold and silver, and men servants and maid servants, and cattle, and lands, and she remained upon them.
8. And there was none that gave her an ill word; for she feared God greatly.
9. Now when she heard the evil words of the people against the governor, that they fainted for lack of water (for JudEs had heard all the words that Ozias had spoken to them, and that he had sworn to deliver the city to the Assyrians after five days)
10. Then she sent her waiting woman that had the government of all things that she had, to call Ozias, and Chabris, and Charmis, the ancients of the city.
11. And they came to her, and she said to them, hear me now, O you governors of the inhabitants of Bethulia: for your words that you have spoken before the people this day are not right, touching this oath which you made, and pronounced between God and you, and have promised to deliver the city to our enemies, unless within these daies the Lord turn to help you.
12. And now who are you, that have tempted God this day, & stand in stead of God amongst the children of men?
13. And now try the Lord Almighty, but you shall never know any thing.
14. For you cannot find the depth of the heart of man, neither can you perceive the things that he thinks: then how can you search out God, that has made all these things, and know his mind, or comprehend his purpose? Nay my brethren, provoke not the Lord our God to anger.
15. For if he will not help us within these few days, he has power to defend us when he will, even every day, or to destroy us before our enemies.
16. Do not bind the counsels of the Lord our God, for God is not as man, that he may be threatened, neither is he as the son of man that he should be wavering.
17. Therefore let us wait for salvation of him, and call upon him to help us, and he will hear our voice if it please him.
18. For there arose none in our age, neither is there any now in these daies, neither tribe, nor family, nor people, nor city among us, which worship gods made with hands, as has been aforetime.
19. For the which cause our fathers were given to the sword, & for a spoil, and had a great fall before our enemies.
20. But we know none other god: therefore we trust that he will not despise us, nor any of our nation.
21. For if we be taken so, all Judea shall lie waste, and our Sanctuary shall be spoiled, and he will require the profanation of it, at our mouth.
22. And the slaughter of our brethren, and the captivity of the country, and the desolation of our inheritance, will he turn upon our heads among the Gentiles, wheresoever we shall be in bondage, and we shall be an offense and a reproach to all them that possess us.
23. For our servitude shall not be directed to favor: but the Lord our God shall turn it to dishonor.
24. Now therefore, O brethren, let us show an example to our brethren, because their hearts depend upon us, and the Sanctuary, and the house, and the Altar rest upon us.
25. Moreover, let us give thanks to the Lord our God, which tries us, even as he did our fathers.
26. Remember what things he did to Abraham, and how he tried Isaac, and what happened to Jacob in Mesopotamia of Syria, when he kept the sheep of Laban his mothers brother.
27. For, he has not tried us in the fire as he did them, for the examination of their hearts, neither has he taken vengeance on us: but the Lord does scourge them that come near to him to admonish them.
28. Then said Ozias to her, All that you have spoken, have you spoken with a good heart, and there is none that may gainsay your words.
29. For this is not the first day in which your wisdom is manifested, but from the beginning of your days all your people have known your understanding, because the disposition of your heart is good.
30. But the people were very thirsty, and compelled us to do to them as we have spoken, and to bring an oath upon ourselves, which we will not break.
31. Therefore now pray you for us, because you are a godly woman, and the Lord will send us rain to fill our cisternes, and we shall faint no more.
32. Then said JudEs to them, hear me, and I will do a thing, which shall go throughout all generations, to the children of our nation.
33. You shall stand this night in the gate, and I will go forth with my waiting woman: and within the days that you have promised to deliver the city to our enemies, the Lord will visit Israel by mine hand.
34. But inquire not you of mine act: for I will not declare it to you, till the things be finished that I do.
35. Then said Ozias and the princes to her, Go in peace, and the Lord God be before you, to take vengeance on our enemies.
36. So they returned from the tent, and went to their wards.Judith|91. Then JudEs fell upon her face, and put ashes upon her head, and uncovered the sackcloth with which she was clothed, and about the time, that the incense of that evening was offered in Jerusalem, in the house of the Lord, JudEs cryed with a loud voice, and said,
2. O Lord God of my father Simeon, to whom you gau a sword to take vengeance of the strangers, who loosened the girdle of a maid to defile her, and discovered the thigh to her shame, and polluted her virginity to her reproach, (for you saidst it shall not be so, and yet they did so.)
3. Therefore you gau their rulers to be slain, so that they died their bed in blood, being deceived, and smot the servants with their Lords, and the Lords upon their thrones:
4. And have given their wives for a pray, and their daughters to be captives, and all their spoils to be divided amongst your deer children: which were moved with your zeal, and abhorred the pollution of their blood, and called upon you for aide: O God, O my God, hear me also a widow.
5. For you have wrought not only those things, but also the things which fell out before, and which ensewed after, you have thought upon the things which are now, and which are to come.
6. Yea what things you did determine were redy at hand, and said, lo we are here; for all your ways are prepared, and your judgments are in your foreknowledge.
7. For behold, the Assyrians are multiplyed in their power: they are exalted with horse and man: they glory in the strength of their footmen: they trust in shield and spear, and bow, and sling, and know not that you are the Lord that break the battels: the Lord is your name.
8. Throw down their strength in your power, and bring down their force in your wrath; for they have purposed to defile your Sanctuary, and to pollute the Tabernacle, where your glorious name rests, and to cast down with sword the horn of your altar.
9. Behold their pride, and send your wrath upon their heads: give into mine hand which am a widow, the power that I have conceived.
10. Smite by the deceit of my lips the servant with the prince, and the prince with the servant: break down their stateliness by the hand of a woman.
11. For your power stands not in multitude, nor your might in strong men, for you are a God of the afflicted, an helper of the oppressed, an upholder of the weak, a protector of the forelorne, a savior of them that are without hope.
12. I pray you, I pray you, O God of my father, and God of the inheritance of Israel, Lord of the heavens, and earth, creator of the waters, king of every creature: hear you my prayer:
13. And make my speech and deceit to be their wound & stripe, who have purposed cruel things against your covenant, and your hallowed house, and against the top of Sion, and against the house of the possession of your children.
14. And make every nation and tribe to acknowledge that you are the God of all power and might, and that there is none other that protectes the people of Israel but you.Judith|101. Now after that she had ceased to cry to the God of Israel, and had made an end of all these words,
2. She rose where she had fallen down, and called her maid, and went down into the house, in the which she abode in the Sabbath days and in her feast days,
3. And pulled off the sackcloth which she had on, and put off the garments of her widowhood, and washed her body all over with water, and anointed herself with precious ointment, and braided the haire of her head, and put on a tire upon it, and put on her garments of gladness, with which she was clad during the life of Manasses her husband.
4. And she took sandals upon her feet, and put about her, her bracelets and her chains, and her rings, and her earerings, and all her ornaments, and decked her self bravely to allure the eyes of all men that should see her.
5. Then she gave her maid a bottle of wine, and a cruse of oil, and filled a bag with parched corn, and lumpes of figs, and with fine bread, so she folded all these things together, and laid them upon her.
6. Thus they went forth to the gate of the city of Bethulia, and found standivg there Ozias, and the ancients of the city Chabris, and Charmis.
7. And when they saw her, that her countenance was altered, and her apparel was changed, they wondered at her beauty very greatly, and said to her,
8. The God, the God of our fathers give you favor, and accomplish your enterprises to the glory of the children of Israel, and to the exaltation of Jerusalem: then they worshiped God.
9. And she said to them, Command the gates of the city to be opened to me, that I may go forth to accomplish the things, whereof you have spoken with me; so they commanded the young men to open to her, as she had spoken.
10. And when they had done so, JudEs went out, she and her maid with her, and the men of the city looked after her, untill she was gone down the mountain, and till she had passed the valley, and could see her no more.
11. Thus they went straight forth in the valley: and the first watch of the Assyrians met her;
12. And took her, and asked her, Of what people are you? and from where com you? and where go you? And she said, I am a woman of the Hebrews, and am fled from them: for they shall be given you to be consumed:
13. And I am coming before Olofernes the chief captain of your army, to declare words of truth, and I will show him a way, by which he shall go, and win all the hil country, without loosing the body or life of any one of his men.
14. Now when the men heard her words, and beheld her countenance, they wondered greatly at her beauty, and said to her;
15. You have saved your life, in that you have hasted to come down to the presence of our lord: now therefore come to his tent, and some of us shall conduct you, untill they have delivered you to his hands.
16. And when you stand before him, be not afraid in your heart: but show to him according to your word, and he will intreat you well.
17. Then they chose out of them an hundred men, to accompany her and her maid, and they brought her to the tent of Olofernes.
18. Then was there a concourse throughout all the campe: for her coming was noised among the tents, and they came about her, as she stood without the tent of Olofernes, till they told him of her.
19. And they wondered at her beauty, and admired the children of Israel because of her, and every one said to his neighbour; Who would despise this people, that have among them such women, surely it is not good that one man of them be left, who being let go, might deceive the whole earth.
20. And they that lay near Olofernes, went out, and all his servants, and they brought her into the tent.
21. Now Olofernes rested upon his bed under a canopy which was wouen with purple, and gold, and emeraudes, and precious stones.
22. So they showed him of her, and he came out before his tent, with silver lamps going before him.
23. And when JudEs was come before him and his servants, they all marveled at the beauty of her countenance; and she fel down upon her face, and did reverence to him; and his servants took her up.Judith|111. Then said Olofernes to her, Woman, be of good comfort, fear not in your heart: for I never hurt any, that was willing to serve Nabuchodonosor the king of all the earth.
2. Now therefore if your people that dwells in the mountains, had not set light by me, I would not have lifted up my spear against them: but they have done these things to themselves.
3. But now tell me therefore you are fled from them, and are come to us: for you are come for safeguard, be of good comfort, you shall live this night, and hereafter.
4. For none shall hurt you, but intreat you well, as they do the servants of king Nabuchodonosor my lord.
5. Then JudEs said to him, receive the words of your servant, and suffer your handmaid to speak in your presence, and I will declare no lie to my lord this night.
6. And if you will follow the words of your handmaid, God will bring the thing perfectly to passe by you, and my lord shall not fail of his purposes,
7. As Nabuchodonosor king of all the earth lives, and as his power lives, who has sent you for the upholding of every living thing: for not only men shall serve him by you, but also the beasts of the field, and the cattle, and the fowls of the aire shall live by your power, under Nabuchodonosor and all his house.
8. For we have heard of your wisdom, and your policies, and it is reported in all the earth, that you only are excellent in all the kingdom, and mighty in knowledge, and wonderful in feates of war.
9. Now as concerning the matter which Achior did speak in your counsel, we have heard his words; for the men of Bethulia saved him, and he declared to them all that he had spoken to you.
10. Therefore, O lord and governor, reject not his word, but lay it up in your heart, for it is true, for our nation shall not be punished, neither can the sword prevail against them, except they sin against their God.
11. And now, that my lord be not defeated, and frustrate of his purpose, even death is now fallen upon them, and their sin has overtaken them, with which they will provoke their God to anger, whensoever they shall do that which is not fit to be done.
12. For their victuals fail them, and all their water is scant, and they have determined to lay hands upon their cattle, and purposed to consume all those things, that God has forbidden them to eat by his laws,
13. And are resolved to spend the first fruits of the corn, & the tenths of wine and oil, which they had sanctified, and reserved for the Priests that serve in Jerusalem, before the face of our God, the which things it is not lawful for any of the people so much as to touch with their hands.
14. For they have sent some to Jerusalem, because they also that dwelt there have done the like, to bring them a license from the Senate.
15. Now when they shall bring them word, they will forthwith do it, and they shall be given you to be destroyed the same day.
16. Therefore I your handmaid knowing all this, am fled from their presence, & God has sent me to work things with you, whereat all the earth shall be astonished, and whosoever shall hear it.
17. For your servant is religious, and serves the God of heaven day & night: now therefore, my lord, I will remain with you, and your servant will go out by night into the valley, and I will pray to God, and he will tel me when they have committed their sins.
18. And I will come, and show it to you: then you shall go forth with all your army, and there shall be none of them that shall resist you.
19. And I will lead you through the midst of Judea, untill you come before Jerusalem, and I will set your throne in the midst of it, and you shall drive them as sheep that have no shepherd, and a dog shall not so much as open his mouth at you: for these things were told me, according to my foreknowledge, and they were declared to me, and I am sent to tell you.
20. Then her words pleased Olofernes, and all his servants, and they marveled at her wisdom, and said,
21. There is not such a woman from one end of the earth to the other, both for beauty of face, and wisdom of words.
22. Likewise Olofernes said to her, God has done well to send you before the people, that strength might be in our hands, and destruction upon them that lightly regard my lord:
23. And now you are both beautiful in your countenance, and witty in your words; surely if you do as you have spoken, your God shall be my God, and you shall dwell in the house of king Nabuchodonosor, and shall be renowned through the whole earth.Judith|121. Then he commanded to bring her in, where his plate was set, and bad that they should prepare for her of his own meats, and that she should drink of his own wine.
2. And JudEs said, I will not eat of it, lest there be an offense: but provision shall be made for me of the things that I have brought.
3. Then Olofernes said to her, If your provision should fail, howe should we give you the like? for there be none with us of your nation.
4. Then said JudEs to him, As your soul lives, my lord, your handemaid shall not spend those things that I have, before the Lord work by mine hand, the things the he has determined.
5. Then the servants of Olofernes brought her into the tent, and she slept till midnight, and she arose when it was towards the morning watch,
6. And sent to Olofernes, saying, Let my lord now command, that your handmaid may go forth to prayer.
7. Then Olofernes commanded his guard that they should not stay her: thus she abode in the camp three days, and went out in the night into the valley of Bethulia, and washed her self in a fountain of water by the campe.
8. And when she came out, she besought the Lord God of Israel to direct her way, to the raising up of the children of her people.
9. So she came in clean, and remained in the tent, untill she did eat her meat at evening.
10. And in the fourth day Olofernes made a feast to his own servants only, and called none of the officers to the banquet.
11. Then said he to Bagoas the Eunuch, who had charge over all that he had: Go now, and persuade this Ebrewe woman which is with you, that she come to us, and eat and drink with us.
12. For lo, it will be a shame for our person, if we shall let such a woman go, not having had her company: for if we draw her not to us, she will laugh us to scorn.
13. Then went Bagoas from the presence of Olofernes, and came to her, and he said, Let not this fair damosell fear to come to my lord, and to be honoured in his presence, and drink wine, and be merry with us, and be made this day as one of the daughters of the Assyrians, which serve in the house of Nabuchodonosor.
14. Then said JudEs to him, Who am I now, that I should gainsay my lord? surely whatsoever pleases him, I will do speedily, and it shall be my joy to the day of my death.
15. So she arose, and decked her self with her apparel, and all her womans attire, and her maid went and laid soft skins on the ground for her, over against Olofernes, which she had received of Bagoas for her daily use, that she might sit, and eat upon them.
16. Now when JudEs came in, and sate down, Olofernes his heart was ravished with her, and his mind was moved, and he desired greatly her company, for he waited a time to deceive her, from the day that he had seen her.
17. Then said Olofernes to her, drink now, and be merry with us.
18. So JudEs said, I will drink now my lord, because my life is magnified in me this day, more then all the days since I was borne.
19. Then she took and ate and drank before him what her maid had prepared.
20. And Olofernes took great delight in her, & drank much more wine, then he had drunk at any time in one day, since he was borne.Judith|131. Now when the evening was come, his servants made haste to depart, and Bagoas shut his tent without, and dismissed the waiters from the presence of his lord, and they went to their beds: for they were all weary, because the feast had been long.
2. And JudEs was left alone in the tent, and Olofernes lying along upon his bed, for he was filled with wine.
3. Now JudEs had commanded her maid to stand without her bedchamber, and to wait for her coming forth as she did daily: for she said, she would go forth to her prayers, and she spoke to Bagoas, according to the same purpose.
4. So all went forth, and none was left in the bedchamber, neither little, nor great. Then JudEs standing by his bed, said in her heart: O Lord God of all power, look at this present upon the works of mine hands for the exaltation of Jerusalem.
5. For now is the time to help your inheritance, and to execute mine enterprises, to the destruction of the enemies, which are risen against us.
6. Then she came to the pillar of the bed, which was at Olofernes head, and took down his fauchin from thence,
7. And approached to his bed, and took hold of the haire of his head, and said, Strengthen me, O Lord God of Israel, this day.
8. And she smote twice upon his neck with all her might, and she took away his head from him,
9. And tumbled his body down from the bed, and pulled down the canopy from the pillars, and anon after she went forth, and gave Olofernes his head to her maid.
10. And she put it in her bag of meat, so they twain went together according to their custom to prayer, and when they passed the campe, they compassed the valley, and went up the mountain of Bethulia, and came to the gates of it.
11. Then said JudEs a far off to the watchmen at the gate, Open, open now the gate: God, even our God is with us, to show his power yet in Jerusalem, and his forces against the enemy, as he has even done this day.
12. Now when the men of her city heard her voice, they made haste to go down to the gate of their city, and they called the Elders of the city.
13. And then they ran altogether both small and great, for it was strange to them that she was come: so they opened the gate, and received them, and made a fire for a light, and stood round about them.
14. Then she said to them with a loud voice, Praise, praise God, praise God, (I say) for he has not taken away his mercy from the house of Israel, but has destroyed our enemies by mine hands this night.
15. So she took the head out of the bag, and showed it, and said to them, Behold the head of Olofernes the chief captain of the army of Assur, and behold the canopy in which he did lie in his drunkenness, and the Lord has smitten him by the hand of a woman.
16. As the Lord lives, who has kept me in my way that I went, my countenance has deceived him to his destruction, and yet has he not committed sin with me, to defile and shame me.
17. Then all the people were wonderfully astonished, and bowed themselves, and worshiped God, and said with one accord: Blessed be you, O our God, which have this day brought to nought the enemies of your people.
18. Then said Ozias to her, O daughter, blessed are you of the most high God, above all the women upon the earth, and blessed be the Lord God, which has created the heavens, and the earth, which has directed you to the cutting off of the head of the chief of our enemies.
19. For this your confidence shall not depart from the heart of men, which remember the power of God for ever.
20. And God turn these things to you for a perpetual praise, to visite you in good things, because you have not spared your life for the affliction of our nation, but have revenged our ruin, walking a straight way before our God: and all the people said, So be it, so be it.Judith|141. Then said JudEs to them, hear me now, my brethren, & take this head, and hang it upon the highest place of your walls.
2. And so soon as the morning shall appear and the Sun shall come forth upon the earth, take you every one his weapons, and go forth every valiant man out of the city, & set you a captain over them, as though you would go down into the field toward the watch of the Assyrians, but go not down.
3. Then they shall take their armour, and shall go into their campe, and raise up the captains of the army of Assur, and they shall run to the tent of Olofernes, but shall not find him, then fear shall fall upon them, and they shall flee before your face.
4. So you, and all that inhabit the coast of Israel, shall pursue them, and overthrow them as they go.
5. But before you do these things, call me Achior the Ammonite, that he may see and know him that despised the house of Israel, and that sent him to us as it were to his death.
6. Then they called Achior out of the house of Ozias, and when he was come, and saw the head of Olofernes in a mans hand, in the assembly of the people, he fell down on his face, and his spirit failed.
7. But when they had recovered him, he fell at Judeths feet, and reverenced her, and said: Blessed are you in all the tabernacle of Juda, and in all nations, which hearing your name shall be astonished.
8. Now therefore tell me all the things that you have done in these days: Then JudEs declared to him in the midst of the people, all that she had done from the day that she went forth, untill that hour she spoke to them.
9. And when she had left off speaking, the people shouted with a loud voice, & made a joyful noise in their city.
10. And when Achior had seen all that the God of Israel had done, he believed in God greatly, and circumcised the foreskin of his flesh, and was joined to the house of Israel to this day.
11. And as soon as the morning arose, they hanged the head of Olofernes upon the wall, and every man took his weapons, and they went forth by bandes to the straits of the mountain.
12. But when the Assyrians saw them, they sent to their leaders, which came to their captains, and tribunes, and to every one of their rulers.
13. So they came to Olofernes tent, and said to him that had the charge of all his things, Waken now our lord: for the slaves have been bold to come down against us to battle, that they may be utterly destroyed.
14. Then went in Bagoas, and knocked at the door of the tent: for he thought that he had slept with JudEs.
15. But because none answered, he opened it, and went into the bedchamber, and found him cast upon the floor dead, & his head was taken from him.
16. Therefore he cried with a loud voice, with weeping, and sighing, and a mighty cry, and rent his garments.
17. After, he went into the tent, where JudEs lodged, and when he found her not, he leaped out to the people, and cried,
18. These slaves have dealt treacherously, one woman of the Hebrews has brought shame upon the house of king Nabuchodonosor: for behold, Olofernes lies upon the ground without a head.
19. When the captains of the Assyrians army heard these words, they rent their coats, and their minds were wonderfully troubled, and there was a cry, and a very great noise throughout the campe.Judith|151. And when they that were in the tents heard, they were astonished at the thing that was done.
2. And fear and trembling fell upon them, so that there was no man that durst abide in the sight of his neighbour, but rushing out altogether, they fled into every way of the plain, and of the hill country.
3. They also that had camped in the mountains, round about Bethulia, fled away. Then the children of Israel every one that was a warrior among them, rushed out upon them.
4. Then sent Ozias to Bethomasthem, and to Bebai, and Chobai, and Cola, and to all the coasts of Israel, such as should tell the things that were done, and that all should rush forth upon their enemies to destroy them.
5. Now when the children of Israel heard it, they all fell upon them with one consent, and slew them to Choba: likewise also they that came from Jerusalem, and from all the hill country, for men had told them what things were done in the campe of their enemies, and they that were in Galaad and in Galile chased them with a great slaughter, untill they were past Damascus, and the borders of it.
6. And the residue that dwelt at Bethulia, fell upon the campe of Assur, and spoiled them, & were greatly enriched.
7. And the children of Israel that returned from the slaughter, had that which remained, and the villages, and the cities that were in the mountains, and in the plain, gate many spoils: for the multitude was very great.
8. Then Joacim the high Pri, and the Ancients of the children of Israel that dwelt in Jerusalem, came to behold the good things that God had showed to Israel, and to see JudEs, and to salute her.
9. And when they came to her, they blessed her with one accord, and said to her, You are the exaltation of Jerusalem: you are the great glory of Israel: you are the great rejoicing of our nation.
10. You have done all these things by your hand: you have done much good to Israel, and God is pleased therewith: blessed be you of the Almighty Lord for evermore: and all the people said, So be it.
11. And the people spoiled the campe, the space of thirty days, and they gave to JudEs Olofernes his tent, and all his plate, and beds, and vessels, and all his stuff: and she took it, and laid it on her mule, and made ready her carts, and laid them thereon.
12. Then all the women of Israel ran together to see her, and blessed her, and made a dance among them for her: and she took branches in her hand, & gave also to the women that were with her.
13. And they put a garland of olive upon her, and her maid that was with her, and she went before the people in the dance, leading all the women: and all the men of Israel followed in their armor with garlands, and with songs in their mouths.Judith|161. Then JudEs began to sing this thanksgiving in all Israel, and all the people sang after her this song of praise.
2. And JudEs said, Begin to my God with timbrels, sing to my Lord with cymbals: tune to him a new Psalme: exalt him, & cal upon his name.
3. For God breaks the battels: for amongst the campes in the midst of the people he has delivered me out of the hands of them that persecuted me.
4. Assur came out of the mountains from the North, he came with ten thousands of his army, the multitude of which stopped the torrents, and their horsemen have covered the hills.
5. He bragged that he would burn up my borders, and kill my young men with the sword, and dash the sucking children against the ground, and make mine infants as a pray, and my virgins as a spoil.
6. But the Almighty Lord has disappointed them by the hand of a woman.
7. For the mighty one did not fall by the young men, neither did the sons of the Titans smite him, nor high giants set upon him: but JudEs the daughter of Merari weakened him with the beauty of her countenance.
8. For she put off the garment of her widowhood, for the exaltation of those that were oppressed in Israel, and anointed her face with ointment, & bound her haire in a tyre, and took a linnen garment to deceive him.
9. Her sandals ravished his eyes, her beauty took his mind prisoner, and the fauchin passed through his neck.
10. The Persians quaked at her boldness, and the Medes were daunted at her hardiness.
11. Then my afflicted shouted for joy, and my weak ones cryed aloud; but they were astonished: these lifted up their voices, but they were overthrown.
12. The sons of the damosels have pierced them through, and wounded them as fugitives children: they perished by the battle of the Lord.
13. I will sing to the Lord a new song, O Lord you are great and glorious, wonderful in strength & invincible.
14. Let all creatures serve you: for you spak, and they were made, you did send forth your spirit, and it created them, and there is none that can resist your voice.
15. For the mountains shall be moved from their foundations with the waters, the rocks shall melt as wax at your presence: yet you are merciful to them that fear you.
16. For all sacrifice is too little for a sweet savor to you, and all the fat is not sufficient, for your burnt offering: but he that fears the Lord is great at all times.
17. woe to the nations that rise up against my kindred: the Lord almighty will take vengeance of them in the day of judgment in putting fire & worms in their flesh, and they shall feel them and weep for ever.
18. Now as soon as they entered into Jerusalem, they worshiped the Lord, and as soon as the people were purified, they offered their burnt offerings, and their free offerings, and their gifts.
19. JudEs also dedicated all the stuff of Olofernes, which the people had given her, and gave the canopy which she had taken out of his bed chamber, for a gift to the Lord.
20. So the people continued feasting in Jerusalem before the Sanctuary, for the space of three months, and JudEs remained with them.
21. After this time, every one returned to his own inheritance, and JudEs went to Bethulia, and remained in her own possession, and was in her time honourable in all the country.
22. And many desired her, but none knew her all the days of her life, after that Manasses her husband was dead, and was gathered to his people.
23. But she increased more and more in honor, and waxed old in her husbands house, being an hundred and five years old, and made her maid free, so she died in Bethulia: and they buried her in the cave of her husband Manasses.
24. And the house of Israel lamented her seauen days, and before she dyed, she did distribute her goods to all them that are neer of kindred to Manasses her husband: and to them that were the neer of her kindred.
25. And there was none that made the children of Israel any more afraid, in the days of JudEs, nor a long time after her death.