Prayer of Azariah|11. Then Azarias stood up & prayed on this manner, and opening his mouth in the midst of the fire, said,
2. Blessed are you, O Lord God of our fathers: your Name is worthy to be praised, and glorified for evermore.
3. For you are righteous in all the things that you have done to us: yea, true are all your works: your ways are right, and all your judgments truth.
4. In all the things that you have brought upon us, and upon the holy city of our fathers, even Jerusalem, you have executed true judgment: for according to truth and judgment, did you bring all these things upon us, because of our sins.
5. For we have sinned and committed iniquity, departing from you.
6. In all things have we trespassed, and not obeyed your commandments, nor kept them, neither done as you have commanded us, that it might go well with us.
7. Therefore all that you have brought upon us, and every thing that you have done to us, you have done in true judgment.
8. And you did deliver us into the hands of lawless enemies, most hateful forsakers and to an unjust King, and the most wicked in all the world.
9. And now we can not open our mouths, we are become a shame, and reproach to your servants, and to them that worship you.
10. Yet deliver us not up wholy for your Names sake, neither disannul you your covenant:
11. And cause not your mercy to depart from us: for your beloved Abrahams sake: for your servant Isaacs sake, and for your holy Israels sake.
12. To whom you have spoken and promised, That you would multiply their seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand that lyeth upon the sea shore.
13. For we, O Lord, are become less then any nation, and be kept under this day in all the world, because of our sins.
14. Neither is there at this time, Prince, or Prophet, or leader, or burnt offering, or sacrifice, or oblation, or incense, or place to sacrifice before you, and to find mercy.
15. Nevertheless in a contrite heart, and an humble spirit, let us be accepted.
16. Like as in the burnt offering of rams and bullockes, and like as in ten thousands of fat lambs: so let our sacrifice be in your sight this day, and that we may wholy go after you: for they shall not be confounded that put their trust in you.
17. And now we follow you, with all our heart, we fear you, and seek your face.
18. Put us not to shame: but deal with us after your louing kindness, and according to the multitude of your mercies.
19. deliver us also according to your marvelous works, and give glory to your Name, O Lord, and let all them that do your servants hurt be ashamed.
20. And let them be confounded in all their power and might, and let their strength be broken.
21. And let them know that you are Lord, the only God, and glorious over the whole world.
22. And the kings servants that put them in, ceased not to make the oven hot with rosin, pitch, tow, and small wood.
23. So that the flame streamed forth above the furnace, forty and nine cubits:
24. And it passed through, and burnt those Chaldeans it found about the furnace.
25. But the Angel of the Lord came down into the oven, together with Azarias and his fellows, and smote the flame of the fire out of the oven:
26. And made the mids of the furnace, as it had been a moist whistling wind, so that the fire touched them not at all, neither hurt nor troubled them.
27. Then the three, as out of one mouth, praised, glorified, and blessed God in the furnace, saying;
28. Blessed are you, O Lord God of our fathers: and to be praised and exalted above all for ever.
29. And blessed is your glorious and holy Name: and to be praised and exalted above all for ever.
30. Blessed are you in the Temple of your holy glory: and to be praised and glorified above all for ever.
31. Blessed are you that behold the depths, and sit upon the Cherubims, and to be praised and exalted above all for ever.
32. Blessed are you on the glorious Throne of your kingdom: and to be praised and glorified above all for ever.
33. Blessed are you in the firmament of heaven: and above all to be praised and glorified for ever.
34. O all you works of the lord, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
35. O you heavens, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
36. O you Angels of the Lord, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
37. O all you waters that be above the heaven, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
38. O all you powers of the Lord, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
39. O you Sun and Moon, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
40. O you stars of heaven, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
41. O every shower and dew, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
42. O all you winds, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
43. O you fire and heat, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
44. O you Winter and Summer, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
45. O you dewes and storms of snow, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
46. O you nights and days, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
47. O you light and darkness, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
48. O you yce and cold, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
49. O you frost and snow, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
50. O you lightnings and clouds, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
51. O let the earth bless the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
52. O you mountains and little hills, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
53. O all you things that grow on the earth, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
54. O you fountains, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
55. O you seas and rivers, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
56. O you whales and all that move in the waters, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
57. O all you fowls of the aire, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
58. O all you beasts and cattle, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
59. O you children of men, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
60. O Israel bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
61. O you priests of the Lord, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
62. O you servants of the Lord, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
63. O you spirits and souls of the righteous, bless you the Lord, praise and exalt him above all for ever.
64. O you holy and humble men of heart, bless you the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever.
65. O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, bless you the Lord, praise and exalt him above all for ever: for he has delivered us from hell, and saved us from the hand of death, and delivered us out of the mids of the furnace, burning flame: even out of the mids of the fire has he delivered us.
66. O give thanks to the Lord, because he is gracious: for his mercy endures for ever.
67. O all you that worship the Lord, bless the God of gods, praise him, and give him thanks: for his mercy endures for ever.